General Engineering Academic Requirements
2016-2017
College of Engineering
UC Santa Barbara
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
2016-2017 Academic Calendar
Note: Dates subject to change without notice.
2016 - 2017 Campus Holidays
Labor Day: Monday, September 5, 2016
Veterans’ Day: Friday, November 11, 2016 
Thanksgiving: Thursday & Friday, November 24 & 25, 2016
Christmas: Monday & Tuesday, December 26 & 27, 2016
New Year: Friday & Monday, December 30, 2016 & January 2, 2017
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day: Monday, January 16, 2017
Presidents’ Day: Monday, February 20, 2017
Cesar Chavez Holiday: Friday, March 31, 2017
Memorial Day: Monday, May 29, 2017
Independence Day: Tuesday, July 4, 2017
 Fall 2016 Winter 2017 Spring 2017 
Quarter begins  September 17, 2016 January 9, 2017 April 3, 2017
New Student Convocation  September 19, 2016
Pre–instruction Activities September 19-21, 2016 January 9, 2017 April 3, 2017
First day of instruction September 22, 2016 January 9, 2017 April 3, 2017
Last day of instruction December 2, 2016 March 17, 2017 June 9, 2017
Final examinations December 3-9, 2016 March 18-24, 2017 June 10-16, 2017
Quarter ends December 9, 2016 March 24, 2017 June 16, 2017
Commencement   June 17-18, 2017
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND NONDISCRIMINATION
The University of California, in accordance with applicable Federal and State law and University pol icy, does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, religion, sex, gender identity, pregnancy1, disability, age, medical condition (cancer related), ancestry, marital status, citizenship, sexual orientation, or status 
as a Vietnam-era veteran or special disabled veteran. The University also prohib-its sexual harassment. This nondiscrimination policy covers admission, access, 
and treat ment in University programs and activities.Inquiries regarding the University’s student-related nondiscrimination policies 
may be directed to the Director of Equal Opportunity at (805) 893-3089. 
1 Pregnancy includes pregnancy, childbirth, and medical conditions related to 
pregnancy or childbirth.
Produced by the College of Engineering, Student Advising Division Glenn Beltz, Associate Dean for Undergraduate Studies
 Peter Allen, Publications Director
     Ian Barin, Multimedia Designer & Photography
This publication is available at: 
www.engineering.ucsb.edu/current_undergraduates/publications
The information in this publication supersedes that in the UCSB General 
Catalog. All announcements herein are subject to revision without notice.
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
College of Engineering • University of California • Santa Barbara
Volume 7, Summer 2016
College of Engineering
Office of Undergraduate Studies
Harold Frank Hall room 1006
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA  93106-5130
Phone: (805) 893-2809 
Fax (805) 893-8124
Email: coe-info@engineering.ucsb.edu
Requirements and policies in the GEAR are 
subject to change each academic year. 
General Engineering Academic Requirements
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
W
elcome to the College of 
Engineering at UC Santa 
Barbara. There are many 
reasons we are one of the top en-
gineering schools in the nation. We 
bring together an amazing faculty, 
the members of which are highly 
acclaimed in the scientific commu-
nities in which they work.  UCSB 
professors are, in fact, among the 
most cited by their colleagues world-
wide, a testament to the quality and 
creativity of their research.  A high 
percentage of the faculty has been 
elected to the prestigious National 
Academy of Sciences and National 
Academy of Engineering.  We have 
six Nobel Prize winners on this cam-
pus, five of whom are faculty in engi-
neering and the sciences. We’re also 
home to an amazing group of smart, 
accomplished, high-energy students.  
These more than 1,400 undergradu-
ates, pursuing a variety of interests, 
contribute greatly to the quality of the 
learning environment as well as to 
the overall richness of campus life.
We have crafted courses that bal-
ance theory and applied science 
so our students are well prepared 
for successful careers in academia 
ent to pursue new fields of scientific 
inquiry.  We also bring an entre-
preneurial attitude to our research, 
focusing on applications as much as 
discovery. 
Our leading programs in areas as di-
verse as biotechnology, communica-
tions, computer security, materials, 
nanotechnology, networking, and 
photonic devices attest to the suc-
cess of this approach.
At the core of this activity are our 
students, our central purpose. We 
encourage you to pursue every op-
portunity, both inside and outside 
the classroom, to enhance your 
education.  We have a talented and 
wise faculty and staff, equipped with 
extensive knowledge and diverse 
experience, to help you make  
decisions about courses and other 
activities as you pursue your degree.  
We look forward to having you in our 
classes, laboratories, and offices as 
you discover where your interests 
lead you.
Message from the Associate Dean
and in industry.  Students espe-
cially interested in engineering and 
industry can take advantage of our 
Technology Management Program.  
Through coursework and “real world” 
experiences, the program gives 
our students insight into the world 
of technology from a business per-
spective. We want our students to 
understand what transforms a good 
technical idea into a good business 
idea.  We want to give them a head 
start at attaining leadership positions 
in the technology business sector.
With a thriving interdisciplinary envi-
ronment, our campus culture fosters 
creativity and discovery.  A truly in-
terdisciplinary culture allows all sorts 
of ideas to cross-fertilize and makes 
it easy for faculty to work effectively 
between disciplines to tackle big 
questions.  Visiting scholars tell 
us they don’t often see the kind of 
openness among departments and 
ease of collaboration that they find 
here.
As part of the prestigious and well-
established University of California 
system, we have the resources as 
well as the breadth and depth of tal-
Glenn Beltz 
Associate Dean for 
Undergraduate Studies
----------------Page (3) Break----------------
Table of Contents
Message from the Associate Dean ........................................2
College Overview
Honors Programs ...................................................................4
Education Abroad Program ....................................................4
Student Organizations ...........................................................4
Change of Major and Change of College ..............................5
Degree Requirements ............................................................5
Minimal Progress Requirements and College Policy .............5
Five-Year B.S./M.S. Programs ...............................................6
General University Requirements ....................................10
UC Entry Level Writing Requirement ...................................10
American History and Institutions Requirement ...................10
College General Education Requirements ......................10
General Subject Area Requirements ...................................11
Special Subject Area Requirements
 Writing Requirement .....................................................11
 Depth Requirement ......................................................11
 Ethnicity Requirement ..................................................11
 European Traditions Requirement ................................12
General Education Course Listing .......................................12
Checklist of General Education Requirements   ..................21
Department and Program Information
Chemical Engineering ..........................................................22
Computer Engineering .........................................................25
Computer Science ...............................................................26
Electrical and Computer Engineering ..................................30
Engineering Sciences ..........................................................37
Materials...............................................................................38
Mechanical Engineering ......................................................40
Technology Management Program.......................................44
Major Requirements (2015-2016)
Chemical Engineering ..........................................................46
Computer Engineering .........................................................48
Computer Science ...............................................................50
Electrical Engineering ..........................................................52
Mechanical Engineering ......................................................54
Additional Resources ........................................................56
Academic Year Calendar.................................Inside Front Cover 
College Policy on Academic Conduct........Inside Back Cover
Members of the Society of Women Engineers (SWE) set up to welcome new students during Discover Engineering.
New engineering students mingle and enjoy their first free lunch as undergrads at Discover Engineering.
----------------Page (4) Break----------------
4 • COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
The College of Engineering at UCSB 
is noted for its excellence in teach-
ing, research, and service to the com-
munity. The college has an enrollment of 
approximately 1,400 undergraduate stu-
dents and 750 graduate students with a 
full-time, permanent faculty of 129. This 
results in an excellent student to faculty 
ratio and a strong sense of community in 
the college.
     Our modern laboratory facilities are available to undergraduate as well as 
graduate students. UCSB has an unusu-
ally high proportion of undergraduates 
who are actively involved in faculty-
directed research and independent study 
projects.
 The college offers the bachelor of sci-
ence degree in five disciplines: chemical 
engineering, computer engineering, com-
puter science, electrical engineering, and 
mechanical engineering. The undergradu-
ate programs in chemical, computer, 
electrical, and mechanical engineering 
are accredited by the Engineering Ac-
creditation Commission of ABET, and the 
computer science bachelor of science 
program is accredited by the Computing 
Accreditation Commission of ABET, http://
www.abet.org.
 The curriculum for the bachelor of 
science degree is designed to be com-
pleted in four years. Completion of the 
four-year program provides students with 
the background to begin professional 
careers or to enter graduate programs 
in engineering or computer science, or 
professional schools of business, medi-
cine, or law. Our curricula are specifically 
planned to retain both of these options 
and to assure that our graduates are 
equally well prepared to enter industry 
and graduate study. The college and the 
university offer a wide variety of career 
counseling and job placement services.
 The Office of Undergraduate Stud-
ies in Harold Frank Hall, Room 1006, 
provides academic advising for all un-
dergraduates in the college. Faculty and 
academic advisors for the individual ma-
jors are also provided by the respective 
departments. This publication contains 
detailed information about the various 
programs and schedules and is pub-
lished yearly. Copies may be obtained 
by writing to the College of Engineering, 
Harold Frank Hall, Room 1006, Universi-
ty of California, Santa Barbara, California 
93106-5130. Alternatively, it is available 
on the web at: www.engineering.ucsb.
edu/current_undergraduates. 
Mission Statement
The mission of the College of Engi-
neering is to provide its students a firm 
grounding in scientific and mathematical 
fundamentals; experience in analysis, 
synthesis, and design of engineer-
ing systems; and exposure to current 
engineering practice and cutting edge 
engineering research and technology. 
A spirit of entrepreneurship in educa-
tion, scholarly activity and participation 
in engineering practice infuses UCSB’s 
College of Engineering.
College of Engineering 
Honors Program
The Honors Program in the College of 
Engineering is designed to enrich the edu-
cational opportunities of its best students. 
Students in the Honors Program will be en-
couraged to participate in early experienc-
es in scholarship through special seminars 
and individualized work in regular courses 
and, in later years, as members of research 
teams. Students in the Honors Program will 
be provided opportunities to become peer 
mentors and tutors within the College.
Participation in the Honors Program 
offers preferential enrollment in classes 
for continuing students as well as gradu-
ate student library privileges. Housing is 
available to eligible first-year students in 
Scholars’ Halls located in several universi-
ty-owned residence halls.
The College of Engineering invites 
approximately the top 10% of incoming 
freshmen into the Honors Program based 
on a combination of high school GPA and 
SAT or ACT scores. (Please note: eligibility 
criteria are subject to change at any time.) 
Transfer students with a UC transferable 
GPA of 3.6 or greater are invited to join the 
College Honors Program. Students who do 
not enter the College of Engineering with 
honors at the time of admission to UCSB 
may petition to enter the program after at-
taining a cumulative GPA of 3.5 or greater 
after completing two regular quarters at 
UCSB. Students will not be permitted to 
join the Honors Program once they begin 
their senior curriculum year.
To graduate as an Honors Program 
Scholar, students must complete 6.0 total 
Honors units during their junior and senior 
years; comprised of coursework from 
departmental 196, 197, 199 or graduate 
level courses with grades of B or higher, 
complete a total of 10 hours of community 
service for each year they are program 
members and maintain a 3.5 or higher 
cumulative GPA at the end of each Spring 
quarter. 
Continued participation in the College 
Honors Program is dependent on maintain-
ing a cumulative GPA of 3.5 or greater and 
active participation in both the academic 
and community service components of the 
Program. 
Dean’s Honors
The College of Engineering gives public 
recognition to its outstanding undergradu-
ate students by awarding Dean’s Honors 
at the end of each regular academic 
term to students who have earned a 3.5 
grade-point average for the quarter and 
have completed a program of 12 or more 
letter-graded units. (Grades of Incomplete 
or Not Passed automatically disqualify 
students for eligibility for Dean’s Honors.) 
The Dean’s Honors List is posted quarterly, 
and the award is noted quarterly on the 
student’s permanent transcript.
Graduating students of the College of 
Engineering who have achieved distin-
guished scholarship while at the university 
may qualify for Honors, High Honors, or 
Highest Honors at graduation.
Tau Beta Pi
Tau Beta Pi is the nation’s oldest and larg-
est engineering honor society. Its purpose 
is to honor academic achievement in engi-
neering. Election to membership is by invi-
tation only. To be eligible for consideration, 
students must be in the top one-eighth of
their junior class or the top one-fifth of the
senior class. Graduate students and faculty 
also belong to this honor society. In addi-
tion to regular meetings on campus, the or-
ganization participates in regional and na-
tional activities and sponsors local events, 
such as tutoring and leadership training, to 
serve the campus and community.
Education Abroad 
Program (EAP)
Students are encouraged to broaden their 
academic experience by studying abroad 
for a year, or part of a year, under the aus-
pices of the University of California Educa-
tion Abroad Program See the EAP web site 
for more information: www.eap.ucsb.edu
Student Organizations
Student chapters of a number of engineer-
ing professional organizations are active on 
the UCSB campus. Students interested in 
any of these organizations may contact the 
Office of Undergraduate Studies of the Col-
lege of Engineering for more information.
• American Indians in Science and Engi-
neering Society 
• American Institute of Chemical Engineers
• American Society of Mechanical 
 Engineers
• Association for Computing Machinery
• Engineering Student Council
• Engineers without Borders
• Entrepreneurs Association
• Institute of Electrical and Electronics  
Engineers
• Little Big Engineers
• Los Ingenieros (Mexican-American  
Engineering Society/Society of Hispanic  
Professional Engineers)
• National Society of Black Engineers
• out in Science, Technology, Engineering, 
and Mathematics
College of Engineering
----------------Page (5) Break----------------
COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING • 5
• Society for Advancement of Chicano and  
Native Americans in Science
• Society of Asian Scientists and Engineers
• Society of Women Engineers
• Women in Science and Engineering
• Women in Software and Hardware
Change of Major and 
Change of College
Current UCSB students in a non-engi-
neering major, as well as students wishing 
to change from one engineering major to 
another, are welcome to apply after the 
satisfactory completion of a pre-defined 
set of coursework. However, due to the 
current demand for engineering majors, 
students are cautioned that it is a very 
competitive process and not all appli-
cants will be able to change their majors 
due to limited space availability. It is 
incumbent upon students to continue to 
make progress in a backup major while 
pursuing a new major in the College of 
Engineering, and to periodically consult 
academic advisors in both the desired 
major as well as the backup major 
regarding the viability of pursuing the 
change of major. 
Students who enter UCSB as transfer 
students will not be able to change to or 
add an engineering major, if not initially 
accepted into one. Students who began as 
freshmen who plan to enter an engineering 
major or to change from one engineer-
ing major to another will be expected to 
complete at least 30 units at UCSB before 
petitioning for a change of major and 
usually must satisfy the prerequisites of 
the prospective major. Students who have 
completed more than 105 units will not be 
considered for a change of major/change of 
college in engineering or computer science.
Note: The College of Engineering will 
not accept students from the College of 
Creative Studies or the College of Letters 
and Science after they have completed 105 
units, regardless of their expected unit total 
at graduation.
Notwithstanding any of the major-specific 
requirements described below, we caution 
that the capacity of any given program to 
accept new students changes, sometimes 
substantially, from year to year.  
Chemical Engineering. Admission to the 
Chemical Engineering major is determined 
by a number of factors, including an overall 
UCSB grade point average of 3.0 or better, 
and satisfactory completion of the following 
courses or their equivalents:  Math 3A-B, 
Math 4A, Chemistry 1A-1AL or 2A-2AC, 
1B-1BL or 2B-2BC, 1C-1CL or 2C-2CC; 
Engineering 3; and Physics 1-2.  Decisions 
involving factors beyond scores and grades 
are made exclusively by the chemical 
engineering faculty. Only a limited number 
of petitions will be approved.
Computer Engineering. Students may 
petition to enter the Computer Engineer-
ing major at any time both of the following 
requirements are met:
1.  An overall UCSB grade point average of 
at least 3.0.
2.  Satisfactory completion at UCSB, with 
a grade point average of 3.0 or better, 
of any five classes, including at least 
two Electrical & Computer Engineer-
ing (ECE) classes and two Computer 
Science (CMPSC) classes, from the 
following: Math 4B, ECE 2A-B-C, ECE 
15A, CMPSC 16, 24, 32, 40.
Computer Science. Students may petition 
to enter the Computer Science major when 
the following requirements are met:
1.  A cumulative grade point average of at 
least 3.0;
2.  Satisfactory completion of Computer 
Science 16 and 24 with a cumulative 
GPA of 3.2 or higher; First takes only
3.  Satisfactory completion of Math 3A, 3B, 
4A, 4B and Computer Science 40 with 
a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or higher; First 
takes only
The selection process is highly competitive 
and these milestones are minimum require-
ments for consideration, achieving them 
does not guarantee admission to the Com-
puter Science major.  Any petitions denied 
will be automatically considered a second 
time in the next quarter.  Petitions denied a 
second time will not be reconsidered. More 
information can be found at http://cs.ucsb.
edu/undergraduate/admissions/.
Electrical Engineering. Students may 
petition to enter the Electrical Engineering 
major once both of the following require-
ments are met:
1. An overall UCSB grade point average of 
at least 3.0.
2. Satisfactory completion at UCSB, with a 
grade point average of 3.0 or better, of at 
least five classes, including at least two 
mathematics classes, from the follow-
ing: Math 4B, Math 6A, Math 6B, ECE 
2A-B-C, ECE 15A. The calculation of 
the minimum GPA will be based on all 
classes completed from this list at the 
time of petitioning.
Mechanical Engineering. Before petition-
ing for a change of major to mechanical 
engineering, six (6) of the following core 
courses or their UC equivalents must be 
completed: Math 3A-B; Math 4A; Math 
4B; Math 6A-B; Physics 1-2; ME 14-15 (at 
least one of the 6 courses must include ME 
14 or ME 15).  Acceptance into the major 
will be based on UC grade point aver-
ages, applicable courses completed, and 
space availability. All students considering 
changing into Mechanical Engineering are 
required to meet with the ME Academic 
Advisor during their first year.
Degree Requirements
To be eligible for a bachelor of science 
degree from the College of Engineering, 
students must meet three sets of require-
ments: general university requirements, 
college general education requirements, 
and major degree requirements.
General University Requirements
All undergraduate students must satisfy 
university academic residency, UC Entry 
Level Writing Requirement, American his-
tory and institutions, unit, and scholarship 
requirements. These requirements are 
described fully on page 10.
College General Education 
Requirements
All students must satisfy the general 
education requirements for the College 
of Engineering. These requirements are 
described on page 10 and includes a listing 
of courses which meet each requirement. 
Major Degree Requirements
Preparation for the major and major 
requirements for each program must be 
satisfied, including unit and GPA require-
ments. These appear in subsequent sec-
tions of this publication.
Advanced Placement Credit
Students who complete special advanced 
placement courses in high school and who 
earn scores of 3, 4, or 5 on the College 
Board Advanced Placement taken before 
high school graduation will receive 2, 4, 
or 8 units of credit toward graduation at 
UCSB for each such test completed with 
the required scores, provided scores are 
reported to the Office of Admissions. The 
specific unit values assigned to each test, 
course equivalents, and the applicability 
of these credits to the General Education 
requirements are presented in the chart on 
page 8.
Note: Advanced Placement credit earned prior to entering the university will not be 
counted toward the minimum cumulative prog-ress requirements (see General Catalog for 
more details). 
International Baccalaureate Credit
Students completing the International Bac-
calaureate (IB) diploma with a score of 30 
or above will receive 30 quarter units total 
toward their UC undergraduate degree. 
The university grants 8 quarter units for 
certified IB Higher Level examinations 
on which a student scores 5, 6, or 7. The 
university does not grant credit for standard 
level exams.  The application of this credit 
to the General Education requirements and 
course equivalents for these exams are 
listed on page 7.
Note: International Baccalaureate Exami-nation credit earned prior to entering the uni-
versity will not be counted toward maximum unit limitation either for selection of a major or 
for graduation.
----------------Page (6) Break----------------
6 • COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
Minimal Progress 
Requirements
A student in the College of Engineering 
will be placed on academic probation if 
the total number of units passed at UCSB 
is fewer than what is prescribed by the 
prevailing academic Senate regulation re-
garding Minimum Cumulative Progress. At 
least three-fourths of the minimum number 
of academic units passed must include 
courses prescribed for the major.
 The following courses may be counted 
toward the unit minimums: courses re-
peated to raise C-, D, or F grades; courses 
passed by examination; courses graded 
IP (In Progress); courses passed during 
summer session at UCSB or at another ac-
credited college or university and trans-
ferred to UCSB.
 Students must obtain the approval of 
the Associate Dean for Undergraduate 
Studies to deviate from these require-
ments. Approval normally will be granted 
only in cases of medical disability, severe 
personal problems, or accidents.
Students enrolled in dual-degree programs 
must submit their proposed programs of 
study to the Associate Dean for Un-
dergraduate Studies in the College of 
Engineering for approval. The individual 
programs must contain comparable stan-
dards of minimal academic progress.
215–Unit and Quarter Enrollment 
Limitations
The college expects students to graduate within 12 regular quarters for students who 
are admitted as freshmen and 9 regular quar-ters for students admitted as junior transfers 
and with no more than 215 units. College credit earned before high school gradu-
ation does not count toward the 215-unit maximum. This includes credit for Advanced 
Placement and International Baccalaureate examinations, and also college or university 
credit earned while still in high school.Students who are admitted as freshmen 
and remain continuously enrolled will be assessed after 12 regular quarters at UCSB, 
and transfer students admitted as juniors will be assessed after 9 regular quarters at 
UCSB. Summer session does not count as a regular quarter in this calculation, but units 
earned in summer session do apply toward the 215-unit maximum. 
     With the exception of summer sessions, if students leave UCSB and earn a large 
number of units at one or more other aca-demic institutions while they are away, the 
number of quarters allowed at UCSB will be reduced in proportion to the number of terms 
completed elsewhere.      College policy requires students to secure 
specific approval to continue enrollment be-
yond the quarter and unit limits noted above. Students who think they may exceed both the 
quarter limitations and 215 units may submit a Proposed Schedule for Graduation (Study 
Plan) for consideration by the Associate Dean for Undergraduate Studies, but they should 
understand that approval is granted in limited 
circumstances.
Note: The College of Engineering will not ac-
cept students from the College of CreativeStudies or the College of Letters and Science 
after they have completed 105 units, regard-
less of their expected unit total at graduation.
Five-Year B.S./M.S. 
Degree Programs
Five-Year B.S. / M.S. in Computer 
Science.  A combined BS/MS Program in 
Computer Science provides an opportunity for outstanding undergraduates to earn both 
degrees in five years. Additional informa-tion about this program is available from 
the Computer Science graduate advisor. Interested students should make their interest 
known to the department early in their junior year. Advising and application materials are 
also available in the Department of Computer Science office. 
Five-Year B.S. in Computer Engi-
neering / M.S. in Computer Science 
The Computer Engineering Program incorporates the design of computer 
hardware and software to meet the needs for various career applications. Students 
are trained to work with systems ranging from small integrated circuits to worldwide 
communications networks, from digital watches to supercomputers, and from single-
line programs to operating systems. For more information on the program, please consult 
the Computer Engineering department.
Five-Year B.S. in Computer Engi-
neering or Electrical Engineering / 
M.S. in Electrical and Computer En-
gineering.  A combined BS/MS Program 
in Computer Science provides an opportunity for outstanding undergraduates to earn both 
degrees in five years. Additional informa-tion about this program is available from the 
Electrical and Computer Engineering gradu-ate advisor. Interested students should make 
their interest known to the department early in their junior year. Advising and application 
materials are also available in the Depart-ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
office.
Five-Year B.S. in Chemical Engi-
neering, Electrical Engineering, or 
Mechanical Engineering / 
M.S. in Electrical and Computer
Engineering
A combined B.S. Engineering/M.S. Materials program provides an opportunity for 
outstanding undergraduates in chemical, electrical, or mechanical engineering to 
earn both of these degrees in five years. This program enables students to develop 
all of the requisite knowledge in their core engineering disciplines and to complement 
this with a solid background in materials. This combination provides highly desirable 
training from an industrial employment 
perspective and capitalizes on the strengths of our internationally renowned materials 
department.
There is a five-year option for students who are pursuing a B.S. in Chemistry in the 
College of Letters and Science to complete an M.S. degree in Materials. Interested students 
should contact the Undergraduate Advisor in the Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry 
for additional information.
Five-Year B.S. / M.S. in Mechanical 
Engineering. A combined B.S./M.S. pro-
gram in Mechanical Engineering provides an opportunity for outstanding undergraduates to 
earn both degrees in five years. Additional in-formation about this program is available from 
the Mechanical Engineering Undergrad Advis-ing office. Interested students should contact 
the office fall quarter of their junior year. In addition to fulfilling undergraduate degree 
requirements, B.S./M.S. degree candidates must meet Graduate Division degree require-
ments, including university requirements for academic residence and units of coursework.
----------------Page (7) Break----------------
COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING • 7
International Baccalaureate Higher Level Exam  
(With Score of 5 or Higher)
Exam Units GE Credit UCSB Equivalent          Biology 8 none EEMB 20, MCDB 20
Business and Management 8 none noneChemistry 8 none none
Computer Science 8 none Computer Sciene 8Design Technology 8 none none
Economics 8 D: 2 courses Econ 1,2English A: Literature or 
English AL Language and Literature   
 Score of 5 8 Entry Level Writing Writing 1, 1E, 1LK   Requirment
 Score of 6 8 A1 Writing 1, 1E, 1LK, 2, 2E, 2LK Score of 7 8 A1, A2 Writing 1, 1E, 1LK, 2, 2E, 2LK,  
                           50, 50E, 50LKFilm 8 none none
Geography 8 D: 1 course noneHistory 8 Pending none
History of Africa 8 Pending noneHistory of the Americas 8 Pending none
History of Asia and Oceania 8 Pending noneHistory of Europe and the  8 Pending none 
Middle EastLanguages Other                    8 none See depatment for level
 Than English                           placementMathematics 8 none Mathematics 3A, 3B, 15, 34A,  
                           34B, or equivalentMathematics, Further 8 none none
Music 8 F: 1 course nonePhilosophy 8 E: 1 course none
Physics 8            Physics 10Psychology 8 D: 1 course none
Social & Cultural Anthropology 8 D: 1 course Anthropology 2Theater 8 F: 1 course none
Visual Arts 8 F: 1 course none
# course also satisfies the Quantitative Relationships Requirement           + course also satisfies the World Cultures Requirement
^ course also satisfies the European Traditions Requirement
International Baccalaureate Higher Level Examinations
   Students who earn scores of 5, 6, or 7 on International 
Baccalaureate (IB) Higher Level (HL) Examinations taken before 
high school graduation will receive 8 units of credit toward 
graduation at UCSB for each such test completed with the required 
scores, provided official scores are submitted to the Office of 
Admissions. Students who complete the IB diploma with a score of 
30 or above will receive 30 quarter units total. The university does 
not grant credit for Standard Level (SL) exams. The application 
of this credit to the General Education requirements and course 
equivalents for these exams are listed below.
   Students should be advised that college courses taken before 
or after attending UC may duplicate AP, IB and/or A Level 
examinations. Additionally, exams may duplicate each other 
(for example, an AP or IB exam in the same subject area). If the 
student does duplicate an exam with another exam of the same 
subject content, and/or an exam with a college course, we will 
award credit only once.
   Note: International Baccalaureate credit earned prior to entering 
the university will not be counted toward maximum unit limitations 
either for selection of a major or for graduation.
----------------Page (8) Break----------------
8 • COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
Advanced Placement Exam Units General Ed. UCSB Course Equivalent 
with score of 3, 4, or 5 Awarded Course Credit (You may not enroll in these courses for credit at UCSB) 
Art History 8 F: 1 course Art History 1
*Art Studio 2D Design 8 none *Art Studio 3D Design 8 none 
*Art Studio Drawing 8 none Art Studio 18Biology 8 none EEMB 22, MCDB 20, Natural Science 1C 
Chemistry 8 none noneChinese Language & Culture
 With score of 3 8 H: 1 course With score of 4 8 H: 1 course
 With score of 5 8 H: 1 courseComparative Government and Politics 4 D: 1 course 
+Computer Science A 2  none  Economics – Macroeconomics 4 D: 1 course 
Economics – Microeconomics 4 D: 1 course  *English – Composition and Literature 
 or Language and Composition  With score of 3 8 Entry Level Writing Writing 1, 1E, 1LK 
 With score of 4 8 A1 Writing 1, 1E, 1LK, 2, 2E, 2LK  With score of 5 8 A1, A2 Writing 1, 1E, 1LK, 2, 2E, 2LK, 50, 50E, 50LK 
Environmental Science 4 none Environmental Studies 2    European History 8 E:  1 course 
French Language & Culture With score of 3 8 H: 1 course French 1-3 
 With score of 4 8 H: 1 course French 1-4  With score of 5 8 H: 1 course French 1-5 
German Language & Culture With score of 3 8 H: 1 course German 1-3 
 With score of 4  8 H: 1 course German 1-4  With score of 5 8 H: 1 course German 1-5 
Human Geography 4 D: 1 course Geog 5Italian Language & Culture
 With score of 3 8 H: 1 course Italian 1-3  With score of 4 8 H: 1 course Italian 1-5 
 With score of 5 8 H: 1 course Italian 1-6 Japanese Language & Culture
 With score of 3 8 H: 1 course With score of 4 8 H: 1 course
 With score of 5 8 H: 1 courseLatin  8 H: 1 course Latin 1-3  
*•Mathematics – Calculus AB 4 none Mathematics 3A, 15, 34A, or equivalent (or AB subscore of BC exam)
*†Mathematics – Calculus BC 8 none Mathematics 3A, 3B, 15, 34A, 34B, or equivalentMusic – Theory 8 F: 1 course Music 11 
*Physics 1 8 none none *Physics 2 8 none none
*Physics – B 8 none Physics 10, Natural Science 1A*Physics – C (Mechanics) 4 none Physics 6A and 6AL
*Physics – C (Electricity & Magnetism) 4 none Physics 6B and 6BLPsychology 4 D: 1 course Psychology 1
Spanish Language & Culture With score of 3 8 H: 1 course Spanish 1-3 
 With score of 4 8 H: 1 course Spanish 1-4  With score of 5 8 H: 1 course Spanish 1-5 
Spanish Literature & Culture                     With score of 3 8 H: 1 course Spanish 1-4
 With score of 4 8 H: 1 course Spanish 1-5 With score of 5 8 H: 1 course Spanish 1-6 
Statistics 4 none Communication 87                            PSTAT 5AA-ZZ, Psychology 5
College Board Advanced Placement Credit
    Students who earn scores of 3, 4, or 5 on College Board 
Advanced Placement Examinations taken before high school 
graduation will receive 2, 4, or 8 units of credit toward graduation 
at UCSB for each such test completed with the required scores, 
provided official scores are submitted to the Office of Admissions. 
   Students should be advised that college courses taken before 
or after attending UC may duplicate AP, IB and/or A Level 
examinations.  Additionally, exams may duplicate each other (for 
example, and AP or IB exam in the same subject area). If the 
student does duplicate an exam with another exam of the same 
subject content, and/or an exam with a college course, we will 
award credit only once.
   Note: Advanced Placement credit earned prior to entering the 
university will not be counted toward maximum unit limitations 
either for selection of a major or for graduation.
----------------Page (9) Break----------------
COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING • 9
A Level Exam With A Units General Ed. UCSB Course Equivalent 
Grade of A, B, or C Awarded Credit - Only for Cambridge International exams taken 2013 or later   
       (You may not enroll in these courses for credit at UCSB)
Accounting 12                  Economics 3A, 3BAfrikaans 12
Arabic 12Art and Design 12
Biology 12Chemistry 12
Chinese 12Classical Studies 12
Computing 12                  Computer Science 16Economics 12 Area D: 2 courses Economics 1, 2
English – Language 12English – Literature 12
French 12Geography 12
German 12Hindi 12
History 12Marathi 12
Marine Science 12Mathematics 12                  Mathematics 3A, 3B, 15, 34A, 34B
Mathematics – Further 12                  Mathematics 4AMusic 12
Physics 12                  Physics 6A, 6AL, 6B, 6BL, 6C, 6CLPortuguese 12
Psychology 12 Area D: 1 course Psychology 1, 3, 7Putonghua 12
Sociology 12Spanish 12
Tamil 12Telugu 12
Urdu  12Urdu – Pakistan only 12
 U.S. Government and Politics 4 D: 1 course Political Science 12
U.S. History 8 D: 1 course no equivalentWorld History 8 E: 1 course no equivalent       
A Level Examination Credit
College Board Advanced Placement Credit Cont.
Advanced Placement Exam Units General Ed. UCSB Course Equivalent 
with score of 3, 4, or 5 Awarded Course Credit (You may not enroll in these courses for credit at UCSB)
*  A maximum of 8 units EACH in art studio, English, Mathematics, and Physics is allowed. (The Physics B exam is no longer offered.)
#  Also satisfies the quantitative relationship requirement in Area C. +  Maximum credit for Computer Science A-AB exams is 4 units. (The AB exam is no longer offered.)
Note: Information on this chart is subject to change. For updates go to: http://my.sa.ucsb.edu/catalog/current/UndergraduateEducation/APCreditandChart.aspx.
    Students who earn grades of A, B, or C on UC-approved GCE 
and Hong Kong A Level examinations will receive 12 units of credit 
toward graduation at UCSB for each exam, provided that official 
grades are submitted to the Office of Admissions.  Any general 
education credit or UCSB course equivalents listed in the chart 
below will be awarded only for Cambridge International A Level 
exams taken in 2013 or later, not for exams administered by any 
other agency. (Student may petition for GE or course credit for 
Cambridge International exams taken prior to 2013 or for exams 
administered by other agencies.)
    Students should be advised that college courses taken 
before or after attending UC may duplicate AP, IB and/or A Level 
examinations. Additionally, exams may duplicate each other 
(for example, an AP or IB exam in the same subject area). If the 
student does duplicate an exam with another exam of the same 
subject content, and/or an exam with a college course, we will 
award credit only once.
    Note: A Level examination credit earned prior to entering the 
university will not be counted toward maximum unit limitation either 
for selection of a major or for graduation.
----------------Page (10) Break----------------
10 • GENERAL EDUCATION
General University 
Requirements 
UC Entry Level Writing Requirement 
All students entering the University of 
California must demonstrate an ability to 
write effectively by fulfilling the Entry Level 
Writing requirement. The requirement may 
be met in one of the following ways prior to 
admission:
 1.   by achieving a score of 680 or higher 
on the SAT II: Subject Test in Writing;
2. by achieving a score of 680 or higher 
on the Writing Section of the SAT 
Reasoning Test;
3. by achieving a score of 30 or better 
on the ACT Combined English/Writing 
test;
 4.   by achieving a score of 3 or higher 
on the College Board Advanced 
Placement Examination in English 
Composition and Literature or English 
Language and Composition;
5.   by passing the UC systemwide 
Analytical Writing Placement 
Examination while in high school;
6. by achieving a score of 6 or higher 
on the International Baccalaureate 
(standard level) English A1 
Examination.
 7.   by achieving a score of 5 or higher on 
the International Baccalaureate (higher 
level) English A Examination;
8.   by entering the university with 
transcripts showing the completion 
of an acceptable 3-semester unit 
or 4-quarter unit course in English 
composition equivalent to Writing 2 at 
UCSB, with a grade of C or better.
Students who have not taken the Analytical 
Writing Placement  examination and who 
have not met the UC Entry Level Writing 
Requirement in one of the other ways 
listed above will be required to take the 
examination during their first quarter 
at UCSB (check with Writing Program 
for examination time and location). An 
appropriate score on the examination 
will satisfy the requirement. Only one UC 
examination may be taken – either the 
systemwide Entry Level Examination while 
in high school or the examination given at 
UCSB; and neither may be repeated.
Students who enter UCSB without 
having fulfilled the university’s Entry Level 
Writing requirement and (if they have 
not previously taken the systemwide 
examination) who do not achieve an 
appropriate score on the examination given 
on campus must enroll in Writing 1, 1E 
or Linguistics 12 within their first year at 
UCSB. A grade of C or higher is needed to 
satisfy the requirement. Students who earn 
a grade of C- or lower in will be required to 
repeat the course in successive quarters 
until the requirement is satisfied.
Once students matriculate at UCSB, they 
may not fulfill the requirement by enrolling 
at another institution. Transfer courses 
equivalent to Writing 2 or 50 will not be 
accepted for unit or subject credit unless 
the UC Entry Level Writing requirement has 
already been met. Students will only be 
allowed to meet the Area A requirement of 
the General Education Requirements with 
courses taken after satisfying the UC Entry 
Level Writing  requirement. The Entry Level 
Writing requirement must be completed by 
the end of the third quarter of matriculation. 
Students who do not meet this deadline 
will be blocked from further enrollment at 
UCSB; EMS students should consult with 
the Writing Program.
American History and Institutions 
Requirement 
The American History and Institutions 
requirement is based on the principle that 
American students enrolled at an American 
university should have some knowledge of 
the history and government of their country. 
You may meet this requirement in any one 
of the following ways:
 1. by achieving a score of 3 or higher 
on the College Board Advanced 
Placement Examination in American 
History or American Government and 
Politics; or
 2.   by passing a non-credit examination 
in American history or American 
institutions, offered in the Department 
of History during the first week of each 
quarter. Consult the department for 
further information; or
 3. by achieving a score of 650 or higher 
on SAT II: Subject Test in American 
History; or
 4.   by completing one four-unit course 
from the following list of courses: 
Anthropology 131
Art History 121A-B-C, 136H
Asian American Studies 1, 2
Black Studies 1, 6, 20, 60A-B, 103, 
137E, 169AR-BR-CR
Chicano Studies 1A-B-C, 168B, 174, 
188C
Economics 113A-B, 119
English 133AA-ZZ, 134AA-ZZ, 191
Environmental Studies 173
Feminist Studies 155A, 159B
History 11A, 17A-B-C, 17AH-BH-CH, 
105A, 159B-C, 160A-B, 161A-B, 164C, 
164IA-IB, 164PR, 166A-B-C-LB, 
 168A-B, 169AR-BR-CR, 169M, 
 172A-B, 173T, 175A-B, 176A-B, 177, 
 178A-B, 179A-B
Military Science 27
Political Science 12, 115, 127, 151, 153, 
155, 157, 158, 162, 165, 167, 180, 185
 Religious Studies 7, 14, 61A-B, 151A-B, 
152
Sociology 137E, 140, 144, 155A,
Theater 180A-B
Courses used to fulfill the American 
History and Institutions requirement may 
also be applied to General Education 
or major requirements, or both where 
appropriate. Equivalent courses taken at 
other accredited colleges or universities, 
in UC Extension, or in summer session 
may be acceptable. Students who 
transfer to UCSB from another campus 
of the University of California where 
the American History and Institutions 
Requirement has been considered 
satisfied will automatically fulfill the 
requirement at UCSB.
International students on a nonimmigrant 
visa may petition for a waiver of this 
requirement through the Director of 
International Students and Scholars.
College of Engineering 
General Education 
Requirements
The aims of the General Education 
Program in the College of Engineering are 
to provide a body of knowledge of general 
intellectual value that will give the student 
a broad cultural base and to meet the 
objectives of the engineering profession. 
An appreciation and understanding of 
the humanities and social sciences are 
important in making engineers aware of 
their social responsibilities and enabling 
them to consider related factors in the 
decision-making process.
Students in the College of Engineering 
must complete the General Education 
requirements in order to qualify for 
graduation. Students are reminded that 
other degree requirements exist and 
that they are responsible for familiarizing 
themselves with all bachelor’s degree 
requirements. Not all of the courses 
listed in this publication are offered every 
quarter. Please see the GOLD system for 
General Education courses offered during 
a particular quarter.
It should be noted that for College of 
Engineering transfers who completed 
IGETC (Intersegmental General Education 
Transfer Curriculum), it may be used to 
substitute for the lower division general 
education and breadth requirements 
only. To complete the depth and writing 
requirements, those students will still 
be required to complete at least two 
upper division general education courses 
from General Subject Areas D, E, F, 
G, or H at UCSB after transfer (unless 
the student completed a year-long 
sequence equivalent to one of the Depth 
Requirement sequences as part of the 
IGETC program).
----------------Page (11) Break----------------
11GENERAL EDUCATION •  
Students who have questions about the 
General Education requirements should 
consult with the advisors in College of 
Engineering Office of Undergraduate 
Studies.
GENERAL SUBJECT AREA 
REQUIREMENTS
A total of 8 courses is required to satisfy 
the General Education requirements of the 
College of Engineering. All students must 
follow the pattern of distribution shown 
below:
I. Area A:  English Reading and 
Composition
 Computer Science students will 
complete Writing 2; and Writing 50, 
107T, or 109ST.
 All other engineering majors will 
complete Writing 2E and Writing 
50E during their first year at UCSB.  
Students that are unable to meet this 
requirement must meet an advisor with 
the College of Engineering Office 
 of Undergraduate Studies to discuss 
alternatives.
 NOTE: Students must complete the UC 
Entry Level Writing Requirement before enrolling in courses that fulfill the Area 
A requirement of the General Education program. Please refer to page 10 of this 
publication or the UCSB General Catalog for a list of ways to satisfy the UC Entry 
Level Writing requirement.
II. Areas D, E, F, G & H:  Social 
Sciences, Culture and Thought, 
the Arts, Literature and Foreign 
Language
 At least 6 courses must be completed in 
these areas:
 Areas D and E:  A minimum of 2 courses 
must be completed in areas D and E.
 Areas F and G:  A minimum of 2 courses 
must be completed in areas F and G.
 The general provisions relating to General 
Education requirements, as listed on page 
10, must be followed when completing 
courses in Areas D, E, F, G, and H.
 A complete listing of courses, which will 
satisfy all these requirements starts on 
page 13.
SPECIAL SUBJECT AREA 
REQUIREMENTS
In the process of fulfilling the General 
Education General Subject Areas D 
through H requirements, students must 
complete the following Special Subject 
Area requirements: 
1. Writing Requirement. Objective: To 
study and practice with writing, reading, 
and critical analysis within specific 
disciplines. Students will demonstrate 
abilities by producing written work 
totaling at least 1,800 words that 
is independent of or in addition to 
written examinations. Assessment 
of written work must be a significant 
consideration in total assessment of 
student performance in the course. 
At least four designated General 
Education courses that meet the 
following criteria: (1) the courses require 
one to three papers totaling at least 
1,800 words, exclusive of elements 
such as footnotes, equations, tables of 
contents, or references; (2) the required 
papers are independent of or in addition 
to written examinations; and (3) the 
paper(s) is a significant consideration in 
the assessment of student performance 
in the course. Courses marked with an 
asterisk (*) on the lists in this document 
apply to this requirement. The writing 
requirement may be met only with 
designated UCSB courses. Approved 
by the academic senate.
 NOTES: ENGR 101 may be used as a 
writing requirement class, even by those 
students for whom ENGR 101 is required. 
 
 New transfer students should consult with 
the College Undergraduate Studies Office 
regarding this requirement.
2. Depth Requirement. At least two upper 
division General Education courses 
from two separate departments, in 
each of which a student has already 
successfully completed one  General 
Education course. 
 Alternatively, this entire depth 
requirement may be satisfied by option 
2, completion of one of the following 
sequences: Chicano Studies 1A-B-C, 
Comparative Literature 30A-B-C, 
French 50AX-BX-CX, History 2A-B-C, 
History 2AH-BH-CH, History 4A-B-C, 
History 4AH-BH-CH, History 17A-B-C, 
History 17AH-BH-CH, Philosophy 
20A-B-C, Religious Studies 80A-B-C 
or any three courses from Art History 
6A-B-C-D-DS-DW-E-F-G-H-K. Students 
selecting this option must complete 
all three courses in the sequence. 
Selection of this option does not change 
the number of courses required.
 Only courses from General Subject 
Areas D, E, F, G, or H may be used to 
meet the depth requirement.
 Option three is to complete an approved 
minor or double major, in a discipline 
encompassed by areas D, E, F, or G 
(listed below). This can be done by 
petition only, and petitions must be 
submitted at least three quarters in 
advance of the student’s expected 
graduation date.
 Approved Minors
• American Indian and Indigenous Studies (Religious Studies)
• Anthropology
• Art History
• Asian American Studies
• Black Studies
• Chinese
• Classics
• Comparative Literature
• English
• Feminist Studies
• French
• German Studies
• Global Peace and Security
• History
• Italian Studies
• Japanese
• Jewish Studies (Religious Studies)
• Labor Studies (History)
• Latin American and Iberian Studies
• Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Studies (Feminist Studies)
• Linguistics
• Music
• Philosophy
• Portuguese
• Russian
• Sociocultural Linguistics
• Spanish
• Theatre
• Theatre - Production and Design
• Women, Culture, and Development (Global Studies)
3. Ethnicity Requirement. Objective: To 
learn to identify and understand the 
philosophical, intellectual, historical, 
and/or cultural experiences of 
historically oppressed and excluded 
racial minorities in the United States. 
At least one course that focuses on 
the history and the cultural, intellectual, 
and social experience of one of the 
following groups: Native Americans, 
African Americans, Chicanos/Latinos, or 
Asian Americans. Alternatively, students 
may take a course that provides a 
comparative and integrative context 
for understanding the experience 
of oppressed and excluded racial 
minorities in the United States. Courses 
----------------Page (12) Break----------------
12 • GENERAL EDUCATION
that meet this requirement are marked 
with an ampersand (&) on the lists in 
this document. 
4. European Traditions Requirement. 
Objective: To learn to analyze early and/
or modern European cultures and their 
significance in world affairs. At least 
one course that focuses on European 
cultures or cultures within the European 
Tradition. Courses that meet this 
requirement are marked with a caret (^) 
on the lists in this document.
Other Regulations:
• No more than two courses from the 
same department may apply to the 
General Education areas D, E, F, G, 
and H. (Except if a student completes 
one of the specific course sequences, 
such as History 4A-B-C, listed above for 
the depth requirement.)
• A course listed in more than one 
general subject area can be applied 
to only one of these areas. (Example: 
Art History 6A cannot be applied 
to both areas E and F.) However, a 
course can be applied towards a single 
general subject area and any special 
subject areas which that course fulfills. 
(Example: Asian American Studies 
4 can be applied to the Writing and 
Ethnicity requirements in addition to the 
Area Frequirement.)
• Some courses taken to satisfy the 
General Education requirements may 
also be applied simultaneously to 
the American History and Institutions 
requirement. Such courses must be on 
the list of approved General Education 
courses and on the list of approved 
American History and Institutions 
courses.
• Courses taken to fulfill a General 
Education requirement may be taken 
on a P/NP basis, if the course is offered 
with that grading option (refer to GOLD 
for the grading option for a particular 
course).
GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES
NOTE: The course listing in this booklet reflects the courses accepted for use towards the 
General Education requirements at the time of this document’s publication and is subject 
to change. Please refer to GOLD for a listing of acceptable courses during the given 
quarter. Information in GOLD supersedes the information given here. Only Academic 
Senate approved courses can apply to GE.
AreA A – english reAding And Composition
Objective: To learn to analyza purposes, audiences, ad contexts for writing through study of 
and practice with writing. 
2 courses required
Writing 2 or 2E and Writing 50, 50E, 107T or 109ST are required, and must be taken for 
letter grades.
AreAs d And e – soCiAl sCienCes, Culture & thought 
2 course minimum
Perspective students get information from advisors and student organizations at the College’s Spring Insight.
   Engineering students restore the water wheel at Anisq’Oyo Park in IV.
----------------Page (13) Break----------------
 GENERAL EDUCATION • 13
*   This course applies toward the writing requirement. @ This course applies toward the American History & Institutions requirement.
&  This course applies toward the ethnicity requirement.  ^  This course applies toward the European Traditions requirement.
Area D: Social Sciences 
Objective: To apply perspectives, theories, and methods of social 
science research to understand what motivates, influences, and/or 
determines the behaviors of individuals, groups, and societies. Area D 
courses are based upon systematic studies of human behavior which 
may include observation, experimentation, deductive reasoning, and 
quantatative analysis. 
          Anthropology 2 Introductory Cultural Anthropology      *  Anthropology  3 Introductory  Archaeology
          Anthropology 3SS Introduction to Archaeology          Anthropology 7 Introduction to Biosocial Anthropology
     *  Anthropology 25 Violence and the Japanese State           Anthropology 103A Anthropology of China
          Anthropology 103B Anthropology of Japan           Anthropology 103C Anthropology of Korea 
          Anthropology 109 Human Universals          Anthropology 110 Technology and Culture
     *  Anthropology 122 Anthropology of World Systems          Anthropology 130A-B Third World Environments
@       Anthropology 131 North American Indians          Anthropology 134 Modern Cultures of Latin America
     *  Anthropology 135 Modern Mexican Culture       Anthropology 136 Peoples and Cultures of the Pacific
          Anthropology 137 The Ancient Maya     *  Anthropology 141 Agriculture and Society in Mexico: Past             
              and Present          Anthropology 142 Peoples and Cultures of India
            Anthropology 156 Understanding Africa     *  Anthropology 176 Representations of Sexuality in Modern Japan
    &    Anthropology 191 Indigenous Movements in Asia@ &    Asian American Studies 1 Introduction to Asian American History,             
          1850-Present@ &    Asian American Studies 2 American Migration since 1965
 &    Asian American Studies 7 Asian American Globalization &    Asian American Studies 8 Introduction to Asian American Gender and       
          Sexuality &     Asian American Studies 100AA Chinese Americans
 &     Asian American Studies  100BB Japanese Americans   & *  Asian American Studies 100FF South Asian Americans
 &    Asian American Studies 107 Third World Social Movements  & *  Asian American Studies 111 Asian American Communities and                      
              Contemporary Issues &    Asian American Studies 119 Asian Americans and Race Relations
 &    Asian American Studies 130   Colonialism and Migration in the Passage to                    America                       
 & *  Asian American Studies 131 Asian American Women’s History & *  Asian American Studies 136 Asian American Families
 & *  Asian American Studies 137 Multiethnic Asian Americans &    Asian American Studies 154   Race and Law in Early American History     
 &    Asian American Studies 155   Racial Segregation from the Civil War to the               Civil Rights Movement         
 &     Asian  American  Studies  156    Race  and  Law  in  Modern  America                                                                            &     Asian American Studies 165 Ethnographies of Asian Americans
@ & *  Black Studies 1, 1H Introduction to Afro-American Studies &    Black Studies 4 Critical Introduction to Race and Racism
@ & *  Black Studies 6, 6H The Civil Rights Movement          Black Studies 100 Africa and United States Policy
 & *  Black Studies 102 Black Radicals and the Radical Tradition@ & *  Black Studies 103 The Politics of Black Liberation-The Sixties
 &    Black Studies 122 The Education of Black Children     *  Black Studies 124 Housing, Inheritance and Race
     *  Black Studies 125 Queer Black Studies & *  Black Studies 129 The Urban Dilemma   
 & *  Black Studies 131 Race and Public Policy & *  Black Studies 160 Analyses of Racism and Social Policy in the U.S.
@ & *  Black Studies 169AR-BR-CR Afro-American History (Same as               HIST 169AR-BR-CR)
     *  Black Studies 171 Africa in Film     *  Black Studies 174 From Plantations to Prisons
@ & *  Chicano Studies 1A-B-C Introduction to Chicano/a Studies          Chicano Studies 114 Cultural and Critical Theory
 &    Chicano Studies 137 Chicana/o Oral Traditions &    Chicano Studies 140 The Mexican Cultural Heritage of the Chicano
@&*  Chicano Studies 144  The Chicano Community  &    Chicano Studies 151 De-Colonizing Feminism
@ &    Chicano Studies 168A-B History of the Chicano (Same as HIST 168A-B)
 & *  Chicano Studies 172 Law and Civil Rights  &    Chicano Studies 173 Immigrant Labor Organizing 
@ &    Chicano Studies 174 Chicano/a Politics (Same as POL S 174) & *  Chicano Studies 175 Comparative Social Movements
          Chicano Studies 176 Theories of Social Change and Chicano                Political Life
 &    Chicano Studies 178A Global Migration, Transnationalism in               Chicano/a Contexts 
     *  Chicano Studies 179 Democracy and Diversity &*  Chicano Studies 187 Language, Power, and Learning 
     *  Communication 1 Introduction to Communication  *  Comparative Literature 119 Psychoanalytic Theory
          East Asian Cultural    Gender and Sexuality in Modern Asia               Studies 40
          East Asian Cultural    Anthropology of China               Studies 103A
          East Asian Cultural    Anthropology of Japan                                   Studies 103B
          East Asian Cultural    Anthropology of Contemporary Korea               Studies 103C
          East Asian Cultural    Indigenous Movements in Asian               Studies 140
          East Asian Cultural    The Invention of Tradition in Contemporary                Studies 186  East Asia
          East Asian Cultural    Vietnamese History (Same as HIST 189A)               Studies 189A
          Economics 1 Principles of Economics - Micro          Economics 2 Principles of Economics - Macro
          Economics 9 Introduction to Economics &*  Education 187 Language, Power, and Learning 
     *  Environmental Studies 1 Introduction to Environmental Studies          Environmental Studies 130A-B Third World Environments
          Environmental Studies 132 Human Behavior and Global Environment     *  Feminist Studies 20 or 20H Women, Society and Culture
     *  Feminist Studies 30 or 30H Women, Development, and Globalization     *  Feminist Studies 50 or 50H Global Feminisms and Social Justice
 & *  Feminist Studies 60 or 60H Women of Color: Race, Class and Ethnicity@  *  Feminist Studies 159B Women in American History (Same as 
              HIST 159B)@  *  Feminist Studies 159C Women in Twentieth-Century American  
              History (Same as HIST 159C)          Geography 2 World Regions
          Geography 5 People, Place and Environment       Geography 20 Geography of Surfing
          Geography 108 Urban Geography     *  Geography 108E Urban Geography
          Geography 150 Geography of the United States     *  Global Studies 1 Global History, Culture, and Ideology
     *  Global Studies 2 Global Socioeconomic and Political Processes          Global Studies 11 Introduction to Law and Society
     *  History 5 The History of the Present     *  History 7 Great Issues in the History of Public Policy
     *  History 25 Violence and the Japanese State@ & *  History 11A History of America’s Racial and Ethnic  
          Minorities@  *  History 17A-B-C The American People
@  *  History 17AH-BH-CH The American People (Honors) @         History 105A The Atomic Age
     *  History 117A Towns, Trade, and Urban Culture in the                Middle Ages
     *  History 117C Women, the Family, and Sexuality in the              Middle Ages (Same as FEMST 117C & 
              ME ST 100A)@  *  History 159B-C Women in American History (Same as 
              FEMST 159B-C)@ &    History 161A-B Colonial and Revolutionary America
     *  History 167CA-CB-CP History of American Working Class@ &    History 168A-B History of the Chicanos (Same as CH ST  
          168A-B)@ & *  History 169AR-BR-CR Afro-American History (Same as BL ST  
          169AR-BR-CR)@  *  History 172A-B Politics and Public Policy in the United States 
    @       History 175A-B American Cultural History
     *  History 188S Representations of Sexuality in Modern Japan  *  Italian 161AX The European Union
          Japanese 25 Violence and the Japanese State (Same                  as ANTH 25)
          Japanese 63 Sociology of Japan 
----------------Page (14) Break----------------
14 • GENERAL EDUCATION
*   This course applies toward the writing requirement. @ This course applies toward the American History & Institutions requirement.
&  This course applies toward the ethnicity requirement.  ^  This course applies toward the European Traditions requirement.
     *  Japanese 162 Representations of Sexuality in Modern Japan          Linguistics  20 Language and Linguistics
     *  Linguistics  70 Language in Society          Linguistics 130 Language as Culture
     *  Linguistics 132 Language, Gender, and Sexuality & *  Linguistics 136 African American Language and Culture
     *  Linguistics 170 Language in Social Interaction & *  Linguistics 180 Language in American Ethnic Minorities
 &*  Linguistics 187 Language, Power, and Learning @  *  Military Science 27 American Military History and the Evolution  
               of Western Warfare     *  Music 175F Music Cultures of the World: Middle East
     *  Music 175G Music Cultures of the World: India          Music 175I Music Cultures of the World: Indonesia 
     *  Political Science 1 Introduction to Political Philosophy@  *  Political Science 12 American Government and Politics
     *  Political Science 114 Democracy and Diversity@  *  Political Science 115 Courts, Judges and Politics
     *  Political Science 121 International Politics     *  Political Science 136 Government and Politics of China
          Political Science 150A Politics of the Middle East@       Political Science 151 Voting and Elections
@  *  Political Science 155 Congress          Political Science 171 Politics and Communication
          Psychology 1 Introduction to Psychology            Psychology 101   Health Psychology                                                         
          Psychology 102 Introduction to Social Psychology          Psychology 103 Introduction to Psychopathology
          Psychology 105 Developmental Psychology@  *  Religious Studies 7 Introduction to American Religion
@ & *  Religious Studies 14 Introduction to Native American Religious            Studies
     *  Religious Studies 15 Religion and Psychology          Religious Studies 35 Introduction to Religion and Politics
          Religious Studies 115A  Literature and Religion of the Hebrew Bible/                Old Testament
          Religious Studies 131H  Politics and Religion in the City: Jerusalem     *  Religious Studies 147 Religion and the American Experience
@  *  Religious Studies 151A-B Religion in American History@       Religious Studies 152  Religion in America Today
 & *  Religious Studies 162F South Asians in the U.S.     *  Slavic 152A Slavic and East European Folklore
     *  Slavic 152B Language and Cultural Identity     *  Slavic 152C Ideology and Representation
          Sociology 1  Introduction to Sociology          Sociology 131  Political Sociology
     *  Sociology 134 Social Movements@ & *  Sociology 144  The Chicano Community (Same as 
              CH ST 144)          Sociology 152A  Sociology of Human Sexuality
 & *  Sociology 153 Women and Work (Same as FEMST 153)     *  Spanish 178  Mexican Culture
  A
reA e: Culture And thought 
Objective: To learn to situate and investigate questions about world 
cultures through the study of human history and thought and to learn 
about the roles that citizens play in the construction and negotiation 
of human history and cultures.
      *  Anthropology 138TS Archaeology of Egypt
          Anthropology 176TS Ancient Egyptian Religion     * ^ Art History 6A-B-C Art Survey
          Art History 115E  The Grand Tour: Experiencing Italy in the                Eighteenth Century              
          Art History 136I The City in History          Art History 144D Russian Art
          Art History 148A Contemporary Art History: 1960-2000          Art History 148B Global Art After 1980 
 &    Asian American Studies 71 Introduction to Asian American Religions &    Asian American Studies 138 Asian American Sexualities
 & *  Asian American Studies 161 Asian American Religions (Same as RG ST             123)
          Black Studies 3 Introduction to African Studies     *  Black Studies 5 Blacks and Western Civilization
     *  Black Studies 7 Introduction to Caribbean Studies     *  Black Studies 49A-B Survey of African History
 & *  Black Studies 50 Blacks in the Media
     *  Black Studies 104 Black Marxism     *  Black Studies 130A Negritude and African Literature 
          Black Studies 130B The Black Francophone Novel          Chicano Studies 13 Critical Introduction to Ancient Mesoamerica
          Chinese 26 New Phenomena in 21st Century Chinese           Chinese 148 Historic Lives
            Chinese  183B  Religious  Practice  and  the  State  in  China                                       Chinese 185A  Qing Empire                                                                
          Chinese 185B  Modern China (since 1911)          ^ Classics 20B The Romans                                               
        ^ Classics 50 Introduction to Classical Archaeology        ^ Classics 101 The Greek Intellectual Experience: From            
              Poetry to Philosophy     * ^ Classics 106 Magic and Medicine in Ancient Greece
      ^ Classics 140 Slavery and Freedom in the Ancient World        ^ Classics 150 The Fall of the Ancient Republic:  Cicero,          
              Caesar, and Rome         Classics 151 Emporers and Gladiators: History of the Roman  
              Empire to 180CE     * ^ Classics 171 Artifact and Text: The Archaeology and              
              Literature of Early Greece          Comparative Literature 27 Memory: Bridging the Humanities and               
              Neurosciences (Same as FR 40X & MCDB 27)     * ^ Comparative Literature 30A-B-C Major Works of European Literature
     *  Comparative Literature 35 The Making of the Modern World     *  Comparative Literature 113 Trauma, Memory, Historiography
     *  Comparative Literature 119 Psychoanalytic Theory     *  Comparative Literature 122A Representations of the Holocaust (Same as         
              GER 116A)          Comparative Literature 171 Post Colonial Cultures (Same as FR 154G)
     *  Comparative Literature 179A Revolutions: Marx, Nietzsche, Freud (Same as                 GER 179A)
     *  Comparative Literature 186RR Romantic Revolutions: Philosophy, History, and the                Arts in Europe
     *  East Asian Cultural Studies 3 Introduction to Asian Religious Traditions                        (Same as RG ST 3)
     *  East Asian Cultural Studies 4A-B East Asian Traditions     *  East Asian Cultural Studies 5 Introduction to Buddhism
          East Asian Cultural Studies 7   Asian Values                                                                   *  East Asian Cultural Studies 21 Zen
     *  East Asian Cultural Studies 80 East Asian Civilization (Same as HIST 80)          East Asian Cultural Studies 164B Buddhist Traditions in East Asia
     *  Environmental Studies 3 Introduction to the Social and Cultural                          Environment
          French 40X Memory: Bridging the Humanities and                             Neuroscience (Same as C LIT 27 & MCDB 27)
        ^ French 50AX-BX-CX Tales of Love     *  French 149C Reading Paris (1830-1890)
     *  French 154F Time Off in Paris          French 154G Post-Colonial Cultures (Same as C LIT 171)
     *  French 155D Citoyennes! Women and Politics in Modern               France (Same as FEMST 171CN)
     *  German 43A Dreaming Revolutions: Introduction to                             Marx, Nietzsche and Freud
     *  German 43C Germany Today                                     *^ German 111 Contemporary German Art and Politics
     *^ German 112  Introduction to German Culture     *  German 116A Representations of the Holocaust (Same as         
              C LIT 122A)     *  German 179A Revolutions: Marx, Nietzsche, Freud
     *  Global Studies 1 Global History, Culture, and Ideology     * ^ History 2A-B-C World History
     * ^ History 2AH-BH-CH World History (Honors)     * ^ History 4A-B-C Western Civilization
     * ^ History 4AH-BH-CH Western Civilization (Honors)     *  History 8 Introduction to History of Latin America
          History 20   Science, Technology, and Medicine in Modern                 Society                       
     *  History 46 Survey of Middle Eastern History     *  History 49A-B Survey of African History
     *  History 80 East Asian Civilization (Same as EACS 80)     *  History 87 Japanese History through Art and Literature
          History 88 Survey of South Asian History     *  History 106A The Origins of Western Science, Antiquity to     
              1500 (Same as ENV S 108A)   *  History 106B The Scientific Revolution, 1500 to 1800
     *  History 106C History of Modern Science          History 107C The Darwinian Revolution and Modern Biology 
               Same as ENV S 107C)
----------------Page (15) Break----------------
 GENERAL EDUCATION • 15
*   This course applies toward the writing requirement. @ This course applies toward the American History & Institutions requirement.
&  This course applies toward the ethnicity requirement.  ^  This course applies toward the European Traditions requirement.
AreA F And g – Arts And literAture
2 courses minimum
AreA F: Arts
Objective: To develop an appreciation of fine and performing arts, 
popular arts, and visual culture and to express relationships between 
arts and historical or cultural contexts. 
  *  Art 1A Visual Literacy          Art 7A The Intersections of Art and Life
          Art 106W  Introduction to 2D/3D Visualizations in                Architecture                      
          Art 125 Art Since 1950          Art History 1 Introduction to Art
     *  Art History 5A Introduction to Architecture and the            Environment
          Art History 5B Introduction to Museum Studies     * ^ Art History 6A Art Survey I: Ancient Art-Medieval Art
     * ^ Art History 6B Art Survey II: Renaissance Art-Baroque Art     * ^ Art History 6C Art Survey III: Modern-Contemporary Art
     *  Art History 6DS Survey: History of Art in China     *  Art History 6DW Survey: Art of Japan and Korea
          Art History 6E Survey: Arts in Africa, Oceania, and Native                  North America
     *  Art History 6F Survey: Architecture and Planning     *  Art History 6G Survey: History of Photography
     *  Art History 6H Pre-Columbian Art          Art History 6J Survey: Contemporary Architecture
     *  Art History 6K Islamic Art and Architecture          Art History 103A Roman Architecture
          Art History 103B Roman Art: From the Republic to Empire                (509 BC to AD 337 )
          Art History 103C Greek Architecture          Art History 105C Medieval Architecture: From Constantine  
              to Charlemagne          Art History 105E The Origins of Romanesque Architecture
          Art History 105G Late Romanesque and Gothic Architecture          Art History 105L Art and Society in Late Medieval Tuscany
          Art History 107A Painting in Fifteenth-Century Netherlands          Art History 107B Painting in Sixteenth-Century Netherlands
          Art History 109A Italian Renaissance Art 1400-1500          Art History 109B Italian Renaissance Art 1500-1600
          Art History 109C Art as Technique, Labor, and Idea in                Renaissance Italy
          Art History 109D Art and the Formation of Social Subjects                in Early Modern Italy
          Art History 109E Michelangelo           Art History 109F Italian Journeys
          Art History 109G Leonardo Da Vinci: Art, Science and                Technology in Early Modern Italy
          Art History 111B Dutch Art in the Age of Rembrandt          Art History 111C Dutch Art in the Age of Vermeer
          Art History 111F Rethinking Rembrandt          Art History 113A Seventeenth-Century Art in Southern  
          Europe          Art History 113B Seventeenth-Century Art in Italy
          Art History 113F Bernini and the Age of the Baroque          Art History 115B Eighteenth-Century Art 1750-1810
          Art History 115C Eighteenth-Century British Art and Culture          Art History 115D Eighteenth-Century Art in Italy: The Age  
              of the Grand Tour          Art History 117B Nineteenth-Century Art 1848-1900
          Art History 117C Nineteenth-Century British Art and Culture          Art History 117F Impressionism and Post-Impressionism
          Art History 119A Art in the Modern World          Art History 119B Contemporary Art
          Art History 119C Expressionism to New Objectivity, Early                  Twentieth-Century German Art
          Art History 119D Art in the Post-Modern World          Art History 119E Early Twentieth -Century European Art  
          1900-1945          Art History 119F Art of the Postwar Period 1945-1968
          Art History 119G Critical Approaches to Visual Culture@       Art History 121A American Art from the Revolution to Civil  
              War: 1700-1860
     *  History 114B-C-D History of Christianity          History 133A Nineteenth Century Germany
          History 133B-C Twentieth Century Germany        ^ History 133D The Holocaust in German History
     *  History 182A-B Korean History and Civilization (Same as                         KOR 182A-B)
     *  History 185A-B Modern China     *  History 187A-B-C Modern Japan
   *  History 189E History of the Pacific          Italian 20X Introduction to Italian Culture
          Italian 138AA-CX-D-DX-             EX-FX, N, X, XX Cultural Representations in Italy
     *  Italian 138AX Cultural Representations in Italy     *  Italian 144AX Gender and Sexuality in Italian Culture
        ^ Italian 189A Italy Mediterranean              Japanese  162    Representations  of  Sexuality  in  Modern  Japan                              
          Japanese 164 Modernity and the Masses of Taisho Japan                       (Same as HIST 188T)
     *  Korean 182A-B Korean History and Civilization (Same as                         HIST 182A-B)
     *  Latin American & Iberian Interdisciplinary Approaches to History              Studies 101  and Societies of Latin America
     *  Linguistics 30 The Story of English          Linguistics 50 Language and Power
          Linguistics 80 Endangered Languages          Middle East Studies 45 Introduction to Islamic & Near East Studies
          Molecular, Cellular &  Memory: Bridging the Humanities and                             Developmental Biology 27         Neuroscience (Same as C LIT 27 & FR 40X)
     *  Philosophy 1 Short Introduction to Philosophy           Philosophy 3 Critical Thinking
     *  Philosophy 4 Introduction to Ethics     * ^Philosophy 20A-B-C History of Philosophy
      *  Philosophy  100A Ethics     *  Philosophy 100B Theory of Knowledge
     *  Philosophy 100C Philosophy of Language     *  Philosophy 100D Philosophy of Mind
      *  Philosophy  100E Metaphysics     *  Philosophy 112 Philosophy of Religion
     *  Physics 43 Origins: A Dialogue Between Scientists and                     Humanists (Same as RG ST 43)
          Political Science 187 Classical Political Theory          Political Science 188 Modern Political Theory
          Political Science 189 Recent and Contemporary Political Theory     *  Portuguese 125A Culture and Civilization of Portugal 
     *  Portuguese 125B Culture and Civilization of Brazil      *  Religious Studies 1 Introduction to the Study of Religion
     *  Religious Studies 3 Introduction to Asian Religious Traditions                        (Same as EACS 3)
     *  Religious Studies 4 Introduction to Buddhism     *  Religious Studies 5 Introduction to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam
          Religious Studies 6 Islam and Modernity          Religious Studies 12 Religious Approaches to Death
          Religious Studies 18 Comparing Religions     *  Religious Studies 19 The Gods and Goddesses of India
          Religious Studies 20 Indic Civilization     *  Religious Studies 21 Zen
          Religious Studies 25 Global Catholicism          Religious Studies 31 Religions of Tibet
        ^ Religious Studies 34 Saints and Miracles in the Catholic Tradition     *  Religious Studies 43 Origins: A Dialogue Between Scientists and       
              Humanists (Same as PHYS 43) &    Religious Studies 71 Introduction to Asian American Religions
     * ^ Religious Studies 80A-B-C Religion and Western Civilization     *  Religious Studies 116A The New Testament and Early Christianity
 & *  Religious Studies 123 Asian American Religions (Same as                 AS AM 161)
     *  Religious Studies 126 Roman Catholicism Today     *  Religious Studies 130 Judaism
     *  Religious Studies 136 Creation Myths     *  Religious Studies 138B Catholic Practices & Global Cultures
          Religious Studies 162C Sikhism     *  Religious Studies 162E Indian Civilization
          Religious Studies 164B Buddhist Traditions in East Asia          Religious Studies 183B Religious Practice and the State in China 
          Slavic 33 Russian Culture            Slavic 130D Russian Art
          Spanish 153 Basque Studies           Spanish 177 Spanish-American Thought
----------------Page (16) Break----------------
16 • GENERAL EDUCATION
*   This course applies toward the writing requirement. @ This course applies toward the American History & Institutions requirement.
&  This course applies toward the ethnicity requirement.  ^  This course applies toward the European Traditions requirement.
@       Art History 121B Reconstruction, Renaissance, and Realism                  in American Art 1860-1900
@       Art History 121C Twentieth-Century American Art:                 Modernism and Pluralism 1900-Present
 &    Art History 121D African-American Art and the African Legacy          Art History 127A-B African Art
     *  Art History 130A Pre-Columbian Art of Mexico     *  Art History 130B Pre-Columbian Art of the Maya
          Art History 130C The Arts of Spain and New Spain          Art History 130D Pre-Columbian Art of South America
          Art History 132A Mediterranean Cities          Art History 132I Art of Empire
          Art History 134A Buddhist Art          Art History 134B Early Chinese Art
          Art History 134C Chinese Painting          Art History 134D Art and Modern China
          Art History 134E The Art of the Chinese Landscape          Art History 134F The Art of Japan
          Art History 134G Japanese Painting          Art History 134H Ukiyo-e: Pictures of the Floating World
          Art History 136A Nineteenth-Century Architecture          Art History 136B Twentieth-Century Architecture
          Art History 136C Architecture of the United States             Art  History  136D  Design  &  the American Architect                                           
@       Art History 136H Housing American Cultures          Art History 136I The City in History
          Art History 136J Landscape of Colonialism     *^ Art History 136K Modern Architecture in Early Twentieth- 
              Century Europe     *^ Art History 136L From Modernism to Postmodernism in  
                European Architecture          Art History 136M Revival Styles in Southern California 
          Architecture          Art History 136O Sustainable Architecture: History and  
          Aesthetics          Art History 136R  Architecture of the Americas       
             Art History 136V Modern Indian Visual Culture                           Art History136W   Introduction to 2D/3D Visualizations in  
              Architecture                                Art History 136Y Modern Architecture in Souther California
          Art History 141D Birth of the Modern Museum     *^ Art History 141G The Architecture of Museums and Galleries  
              from c. 1800 to the Present          Art History 144A The Avant-Garde in Russia
          Art History 144C Contemporary Art in Russia and Eastern                Europe (Same as SLAV 130C)
          Art History 144D Russian Art          Art History 148A Contemporary Art History: 1960-2000
          Art History 148B Global Art After 1980  & *  Asian American Studies 4 Introduction to Asian American Popular
          Culture &    Asian American Studies 118 Asian Americans in Popular Culture
 &    Asian American Studies 120 Asian American Documentary &    Asian American Studies 127 Asian American Film, Television, and  
              Digital Media &    Asian American Studies 140 Theory & Production of Social Experience
 &    Asian American Studies 146 Racialized Sexuality on Screen and Scene &    Asian American Studies 170KK Special Topics in Asian American Studies
 & *  Black Studies 14 History of Jazz     *  Black Studies 45 Black Arts Expressions
 &    Black Studies 142 Music in Afro-American Culture: U.S.A.     *  Black Studies 153 Black Popular Music in America
          Black Studies 161 Third-World Cinema     *  Black Studies 162 African Cinema
 & *  Black Studies 170 Afro-Americans in the American Cinema     *  Black Studies 171 Africa in Film
 & *  Black Studies 172 Contemporary Black Cinema          Black Studies 175 Black Diaspora Cinema 
 &    Chicano Studies 125B  Contemporary Chicano and Chicana Art &    Chicano Studies 138  Barrio Popular Culture
 &    Chicano Studies 148 Chicana Art and Feminism@ &     Chicano  Studies  188C Chicano  Theater  Workshop
     *  Chinese 40 Popular Culture in Modern Chinese Societies     *  Chinese 170 New Taiwan Cinema
          Chinese 176 Chinese Cinema: Nationalism and Globalism     * ^ Classics 102 Greek Tragedy in Translation
        ^ Classics 165 Greek Painting        ^ Classics 170 Pompeii
          Comparative Literature 186FF NOIR: 1940’s Film and Fiction           Dance 35 History and Appreciation of World Dance
     *  Dance 36 History of Modern Dance          Dance 45 History and Appreciation of Dance
     *  Dance 145A-B Studies in Dance History          East Asian Cultural Studies 134A Buddhist Art
     *  Film & Media Studies 46 Introduction to Cinema     *  Film & Media Studies 120 Japanese Cinema (Same as JAPAN 159)
          Film & Media Studies 121 Chinese Cinema     *  Film & Media Studies 122AA-ZZ Topics in National Cinema
     *  Film & Media Studies 124 Indian Cinema          Film & Media Studies 124V Modern Indian Visual Culture
     *  Film & Media Studies 125A-B Documentary Film     *  Film & Media Studies 126 Cuban Cinema
 & *  Film & Media Studies 127 Latin American Cinema     *  Film & Media Studies 127M Mexican Film and Cinema
     *  Film & Media Studies 134 French and Francophone Cinema     *  Film & Media Studies 136 British Cinema
     *  Film & Media Studies 144 The Horror Film (Same as GER 183)     *  Film & Media Studies 163 Women and Film: Feminist Perspectives
          Film & Media Studies 169 Film Noir          Film & Media Studies 175 Experimental Film
     *  Film & Media Studies 178Z Technology and Cinema (Same as FR 156D)     *  French 156A French Cinema: History and Theory
     *  French 156B French and Francophone Cinema     *  French 156C Modern Images of the Middle Ages: The            
              Intersection of Text, History, and Film     *  French 156D Technology and Cinema (Same as FLMST 178Z)
     *  German 55A Contemporary German Pop Culture           Italian 124X Italian Theatre
          Italian 178B Italian Cinema          Italian 179X Fiction and Film in Italy
     *  Italian 180Z Italian Cinema          Japanese 134F Arts of Japan (Same as ARTHI 134F)
          Japanese 134G Japanese Painting (Same as ARTHI 134G)          Japanese 134H Ukiyo-e: Pictures of the Floating World (Same as  
              ARTHI 134H)          Japanese 149 Traditional Japanese Drama
     *  Japanese 159 Japanese Cinema (Same as FLMST 120)          Japanese 159A Postwar Japanese Cinema (1945-1985)
          Korean 75 Introduction to Popular Culture in Korean Film          Music 11 Fundamentals of Music
      *  Music  15 Music  Appreciation          Music 17 World Music
     *  Music 114 Music and Popular Culture in America     *  Music 115 Symphonic Music
          Music 116 American Music History: Colonial to Present     *  Music 118A History and Literature of Great Composers in     
              Western Music     *  Music 119A Music and Politics
           Music 119B Music in Political Films                                                            Slavic 130A The Avantgarde in Russia
          Slavic 130B Russian Cinema           Slavic 130C Contemporary Art in Russia and Eastern Europe  
              (Same as ARTHI 144C)            Slavic 130D Russian Art
          Slavic 130E Masters of Soviet Cinema          Spanish 126 Spanish Cinema
          Theater 2A-B Performance in Global Contexts     *^ Theater 2C Performance in Global Contexts: Europe     
     *  Theater 3 Life of the Theater          Theater 5 Introduction to Acting
     *  Theater 7 Performance of the Human Body      *  Theater  9 Playwriting
          Theatre 143 The People’s Voice@  *  Theater 180A-B American Drama
     *  Theater 180C Contemporary American Drama and Theater & *  Theater 180E Culture Clash: Studies in U.S. Latino Theater
 & *  Theater 180G Race, Gender, and Performance     *  Theater 182A Ancient Theater and Drama
     *  Theater 182M Modern Theater and Drama     *  Theater 182MC Modern Contemporary
     *  Theater 182N Neoclassical Theater and Drama &*  Theater 184AA African American Performance
     *  Theater 184CA Contemporary African Theater and Performance     *  Theater 188S Shakespeare on Film and Stage
----------------Page (17) Break----------------
 GENERAL EDUCATION • 17
*   This course applies toward the writing requirement. @ This course applies toward the American History & Institutions requirement.
&  This course applies toward the ethnicity requirement.  ^  This course applies toward the European Traditions requirement.
AreA g: literAture
Objective: To learn to analyze texts using methods appropriate to 
literary study and to situate analysis within contexts where texts 
circulate.
  &    Asian American Studies 5 Introduction to Asian American Literature
     *  Asian American Studies 122 Asian American Fiction     *  Asian American Studies 128 Writings by Asian American Women
     *  Black Studies 33 Major Works of African Literatures (Same as                   C LIT 33)
 & *  Black Studies 38A-B Introduction to Afro-American Literature      *  Black Studies 126 Comparative Black Literatures
 & *  Black Studies 127 Black Women Writers     *  Black Studies 130A Negritude and African Literature
          Black Studies 130B The Black Francophone Novel & *  Chicano Studies 152 Postcolonialism  
 & *  Chicano Studies 180 Survey of Chicano Literature & *  Chicano Studies 181 The Chicano Novel
 & *  Chicano Studies 184A Chicana Writers        Chinese 115A Imagism, Haiku, and Chinese Poetry
     *  Chinese 124A-B Readings in Modern Chinese Literature     *  Chinese 132A Classical Chinese Poetry
          Chinese 148 Historic Lives       ^ Classics 20A The Ancient Greeks
        ^ Classics 36 Ancient Epic     * ^ Classics 39 Women in Classical Literature
        ^ Classics 40 Greek Mythology     *^ Classics 55 Troy
     * ^ Classics 102 Greek Tragedy in Translation     * ^ Classics 109 Viewing the Barbarian: Representations of 
              Foreign Peoples in Greek Literature     * ^ Classics 110 From Homer to Harlequin: Masculine, 
              Feminine, and the Romance        ^ Classics 130 Comedy and Satire in Translation
     * ^ Classics 175 Ancient Theories of Literature     * ^ Comparative Literature 30A-B-C Major Works of European Literature
     *  Comparative Literature 31 Major Works of Asian Literatures     *  Comparative Literature 32 Major Works of Middle Eastern Literatures
     *  Comparative Literature 33 Major Works of African Literatures (Same as               BL ST 33)
     *  Comparative Literature 34 Literature of the Americas     *  Comparative Literature 100 Introduction to Comparative Literatures
     *  Comparative Literature 103 Going Postal: Epistolary Narratives (Same as                   ENGL 128EN)
     *  Comparative Literature 107 Voyages to the Unknown     *  Comparative Literature 113 Trauma, Memory, Historiography
     *  Comparative Literature 122A Representations of the Holocaust (Same as                       GER 116A)
     *  Comparative Literature 122B Holocaust in France (Same as FR 154E)     *  Comparative Literature 126 Comparative Black Literatures
     *  Comparative Literature 128A Children’s Literature     *  Comparative Literature 128B Representing Childhood
   *  Comparative Literature 133 Transpacific Literature     *  Comparative Literature 146 Robots
 & *  Comparative Literature 153 Border Narratives     *  Comparative Literature 154 Science Fiction in Eastern Europe
     *  Comparative Literature 161 Literature of Central Europe          Comparative Literature 170 Literary Translation: Theory and Practice
          Comparative Literature 171 Post-Colonial Cultures (Same as FR 154G)     *  Comparative Literature 179A Revolutions: Marx, Nietzsche, Freud (Same as   
              GER 179A)     *  Comparative Literature 179B Mysticism
     *  Comparative Literature 179C Mediatechnology (Same as GER 179C)          Comparative Literature 186AD Adultery in the Novel   
          Comparative Literature 186EE Interdisciplinary Comparative Literature           Comparative Literature 188 Narrative Studies
     *  Comparative Literature 189 Narrative in the First Person          Comparative Literature 191 Fantasy and the Fantastic (Same as FR 153D)
     *  English 15 Introduction to Shakespeare          English 22 Literature and the Environment
     *  English 25 Introduction to Literature and the Culture of                 Information
     *  English 35 Introduction to Literature and the           Environment
 & *  English 38A-B Introduction to African American Literature & *  English 50 Introduction to U.S. Minority Literature
     *  English 65AA-ZZ Topics in Literature     *  English 101 English Literature from the Medieval Period 
              to 1650     *  English 102 English and American Literature from 1650
              to 1789     *  English 103A American Literature from 1789 to 1900
     *  English 103B British Literature from 1789 to 1900     *  English 104A American Literature from 1900 to Present
     *  English 104B British Literature from 1900 to Present     *  English 105A Shakespeare: Poems and Earlier Plays
     *  English 105B Shakespeare: Later Plays     *  English 113AA-ZZ Literary Theory and Criticism
     *  English 114AA-ZZ Women and Literature & *  English  114BW Black  Women  Authors
 & *  English 114NW Native American Women Authors     *  English 115 Medieval Literature
     *  English 116A Biblical Literature: The Old Testament     *  English 116B Biblical Literature: The New Testament
     *  English 119 Studies in Medieval Literature     *  English 119X Medieval Literature in Translation
     *  English 120 Modern Drama     *  English 121 The Art of Narrative
     *  English 122AA-ZZ Cultural Representations & *  English 122BP Cultural Representations
     *  English 122NE Cultural Representations of Nature and the               Environment (Same as ENV S 122NE)
     *  English 124 Readings in the Modern Short Story     *  English 126B-C Survey of British Fiction
     *  English 128AA-ZZ Literary Genres     *  English 131AA-ZZ Studies in American Literature
@  *  English 133AA-ZZ Studies in American Regional Literature@ & *  English 134AA-ZZ Literature of Cultural and Ethnic     
              Communities in the United States     *  English 136 Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century American  
          Literature @  *  English 137A-B Poetry in America
@  *  English 138C Prose Narrative in America Since 1917     *  English 140 Contemporary American Literature
     *  English 150 Anglo-Irish Literature     *  English 152A Chaucer: Canterbury Tales
     *  English 156 Literature of Chivalry     *  English 157 English Renaissance Drama
      *  English  162 Milton     *  English 165AA-ZZ Topics in Literature
     *  English 170AA-ZZ Studies in Literature and the Mind     *  English 172 Studies in the Enlightenment
     *  English 179 British Romantic Writers     *  English 180 The Victorian Era
     *  English 181AL,MT Studies in the Nineteenth Century     *  English 184 Modern European Literature
     *  English 185 Modernism in English     *  English 187AA-ZZ Studies in Modern Literature
     *  English 189 Contemporary Literature     *  English 190AA-ZZ World Literature in English
@ & *  English 191 Afro-American Fiction and Criticism,                1920s to Present
     *  English 192 Science Fiction     *  English 193 Detective Fiction
     *  Environmental Studies 122LE Cultural Representations: Literature and the           Environment
     *  Environmental Studies 122NE Cultural Representations of Nature and                 the Environment (Same as ENGL 122NE)
     *  Environmental Studies 160 American Environmental Literature     *  Feminist Studies 40 or 40H Women, Representation, and Cultural
          Production     *  Feminist Studies 171CN Citoyennes! Women and Politics in Modern  
              France (Same as FR 155D)          French 101A-B-C Literary and Cultural Analysis
     *  French 147A French and Francophone Poetry     *  French 147B French and Francophone Theater 
     *  French 148C Women in the Middle Ages     *  French 148E The Age of Louis XIV   
          French 149B The Politics of Paradise      *  French  149C Reading  Paris  (1830-1890)                                                 
     *  French 149D Post-War Avant-Gardes                                                          *  French 149E Belgian Literature and Art                    
     *  French 153A Medieval Literature in Translation     *  French 153B French Theater in Translation
----------------Page (18) Break----------------
18 • GENERAL EDUCATION
*   This course applies toward the writing requirement. @ This course applies toward the American History & Institutions requirement.
&  This course applies toward the ethnicity requirement.  ^  This course applies toward the European Traditions requirement.
      *  French  153C Autobiography          French 153D Fantasy & the Fantastic (Same as C LIT  191)
     *  French 153E The Power of Negative Thinking: Sartre,                          Adorno, and Marcuse
     *  French 153F Existentialist Literature in Translation     *  French 154A Voyages to the Unknown
      *  French  154D Torture     *  French 154E Holocaust in France (Same as C LIT 122B)
     *  French 154F Time Off in Paris          French 154G Post-Colonial Cultures (Same as C LIT 171)
     *  French 155A Women in the Middle Ages          French 155B Women on Trial
          French 155C French and Fracophone Women Writers     *  French 155D Citoyennes! Women and Politics in Modern       
              France (Same as FEMST 171CN)     *  French 156C Modern Images of the Middle Ages
     *  German 115A-B-C Survey of German Literature     *  German 116A Representations of the Holocaust (Same as         
              C LIT 122A)     *  German 138 Psy Fi: German Science Fiction
     *  German 143 The Superhuman     *  German 151C Literature of Central Europe
     *  German 164E-F-G German Writers in German Language     *  German 179A Revolutions: Marx, Nietzsche, Freud
      *  German  179B Mysticism     *  German 179C Mediatechnology (Same as C LIT 179C)
     *  German 182 Vampirism in German Literature and Beyond     *  German 187 Satan in German Literature and Beyond
        ^ Greek 100 Introduction To Greek Prose        ^ Greek 101 Introduction To Greek Poetry
     *  Hebrew 114A-B-C Readings in Modern Hebrew Prose and Poetry          Italian 101 Modern Italy
          Italian 102  Medieval and  Renaissance Italy          Italian 111 Italian Short Fiction                                              
     *  Italian 114X Dante’s “Divine Comedy”          Italian 126AA-ZZ Literature in Italian
     *  Italian 138AX Cultural Representations in Italy     *  Italian 142X Women in Italy
     *  Italian 144AX Gender and Sexuality in Italian Culture          Italian 179X Fiction and Film in Italy
     *  Japanese 80 Masterpieces in Japanese Literature     *  Japanese 112 Survey of Modern Japanese Literature
          Japanese 115 Twentieth-Century Japanese Literature           Japanese 134F  Arts of Japan                                                              
           Japanese 134G  Japanese Painting                                                                       Japanese  134H  Ukiyo-e:  Pictures  of  the  Floating  World                                   
          Korean 113 Korean Literature Survey        ^ Latin 100 Introduction To Latin Prose
        ^ Latin 101 Introduction To Latin Poetry     *  Latin American & Iberian Interdisciplinary Approaches to the
              Studies 102  Cultures, Languages and Literature     *  Music 187 Strauss and Hofmannsthal
          Portuguese 105A-B-C Survey of Portuguese Literature          Portuguese 106A-B-C Survey of Brazilian Literature
          Portuguese 115AA-ED-EO Brazilian Literature     *  Portuguese 120AA-ZZ Portuguese Literature in English Translation
     *  Religious Studies 114X Dante’s “Divine Comedy”          Religious Studies 129 Religions of the Ancient Near East
     *  Religious Studies 189C Modern Arabic Literature in Translation     *^ Slavic 35 Short Fiction by Major Russian Writers 
          Slavic 117F Chekhov      *  Slavic  117G Dostoevsky
      *  Slavic  117H Tolstoy          Slavic 123A-B Nineteenth Century Russian Literature
          Slavic 123C-D Twentieth Century Russian Literature     *  Slavic 151C Literature of Central Europe
     *  Slavic 164A Death and Its Representations     *  Slavic 164B Science Fiction in Eastern Europe
     *  Slavic 164C Women in Russian Literature          Spanish 102L Introduction to Hispanic Literary Studies  
     *  Spanish 120A-B Contemporary Spanish American Fiction in                       English Translation
          Spanish 131 Spanish Golden Age Poetry & *  Spanish 135 Survey of Chicano Literature
          Spanish 137A-B Golden Age Drama           Spanish 138 Contemporary Mexican Literature 
          Spanish 140A-B Cervantes: Don Quijote          Spanish 174 The Hispanic Novel and Cinema
 & *  Spanish 179 Chicano Novel
Literature Courses Taught in the Original 
Language
     *  Chinese 124A-B Readings in Modern Chinese Literature                   *  Chinese 132A Special Topics in Classical Chinese Poetry
          Chinese 142 Tang Poetry          French 101A-B-C Introduction to Literary and Cultural Analysis
     *  French 147A Renaissance Poetry      *  French  147B French  Theater
     *  French 148C  Women in the Middle Ages     *  French 148E The Age of Louis XIV 
          French 149B The Politics of Paradise     *  French 149C Paris in Nineteenth-Century Literature & Art
      *  French  149D Post-War  Avant-Gardes     *  French 149E Belgian Literature in French
     *  German 115A-B-C Survey of German Literature        ^ Greek 100 Introduction to Greek Prose
        ^ Greek 101 Introduction to Greek Poetry      *  Hebrew 114A-B-C Modern Hebrew Prose and Poetry
          Italian 101 Modern Italy          Italian 102 Advanced Reading and Composition: 
              Medieval and Renaissance Italy          Italian 111 Italian Short Fiction
          Italian 126-A-AA-AB-BB Literature in Italian        ^ Latin 100 Introduction to Latin Prose
        ^ Latin 101 Introduction to Latin Poetry          Portuguese 105A-B-C Survey of Portuguese Literature
          Portuguese 106A-B-C Survey of Brazilian Literature          Religious Studies 129 Religions of the Ancient Near East
     * ^ Slavic 35 Short Fiction by Major Russian Writers          Spanish 30 Introduction to Hispanic Literature
          Spanish 102L Introduction of Hispanic Literature Studies          Spanish 131 Spanish Golden Age Poetry I
          Spanish 137A-B Golden Age Drama          Spanish 138 Contemporary Mexican Literature
 &    Spanish 139 U.S. Latino Literature          Spanish 140A-B Cervantes: Don Quijote
          Spanish 174 Hispanic Novel and Cinema
Area H: Foreign Language
Objective: To help students gain familiarity with a foreign language.
          Chinese 2-3 Elementary Modern Chinese          Chinese 2NH-3NH First Year Chinese Heritage
          Chinese 4-5-6 Intermediate Modern Chinese          Chinese 4NH-5NH-6NH Second Year Chinese Heritage
          French 2-3 Elementary French          French 4-5-6 Intermediate French
          French 6GS Intermediate French: Global Studies- Political  Sci.          German 2-3 Elementary German
          German 4-5-6 Intermediate German           German 95B Intermediate Yiddish
           German 95C Advanced Yiddish          Global Studies 60B-C-D-E-F Punjabi (II-III-IV-V-VI)
          Greek 2 Elementary Greek          Greek 3 Intermediate Greek
          Greek 12-13 Modern Greek          Hebrew 2-3 Elementary Hebrew
          Hebrew 4-5-6 Intermediate Modern Hebrew          Italian 2-3 Elementary Italian
          Italian 4-5-6 Intermediate Italian          Japanese 2-3 First Year Japanese
          Japanese 4-5-6 Second Year Japanese          Latin 2 Elementary Latin
          Latin 3 Intermediate Latin          Portuguese 2-3 Elementary Portuguese
          Portuguese 4-5-6 Intermediate Portuguese          Religious Studies 10B-C-D-E-F Arabic (II-III-IV-V-VI)
          Religious Studies 11B-C-D-E-F Hindi (II-III-IV-V-VI)          Religious Studies 17B-C Biblical Hebrew (II-III)
          Religious Studies 30B-C-D-E-F Tibetan (II-III-IV-V-VI)          Religious Studies 45B-C-D-E-F Pashto (II-III-IV-V-VI)
          Religious Studies 57B-C-D-E-F Persian (II-III-IV-V-VI)          Religious Studies 60B-C-D-E-F Punjabi (II-III-IV-V-VI)
----------------Page (19) Break----------------
 GENERAL EDUCATION • 19
*   This course applies toward the writing requirement. @ This course applies toward the American History & Institutions requirement.
&  This course applies toward the ethnicity requirement.  ^  This course applies toward the European Traditions requirement.
          Religious Studies 65B-C-D-E-F Turkish (II-III-IV-V-VI)          Religious Studies 122B Syriac  (II-III)
          Religious Studies 157A-B-C Advanced Persian (I-II-III)          Religious Studies 159B-C Elementary Sanskrit
          Slavic 2-3 Elementary Russian          Slavic 4-5-6 Intermediate Russian
          Spanish 2-3 Elementary Spanish          Spanish 2SS-3SS Intensive Elementary Spanish
          Spanish 4-5-6 Intermediate Spanish          Spanish 4SS-5SS-6SS Intensive Intermediate Spanish
 
Special Subject Area Supplementary List of Courses
Note:  These courses do not fulfill requirements for Areas D, E, F, G or 
H, and may not be used to fulfill the depth requirement; they satisfy the 
university and special subject area requirements listed only.
     *  Anthropology 116A Myth, Ritual, and Symbol     *  Anthropology 116B Anthropological Approaches to Religion
     *  Anthropology 143 Introduction to Contemporary Social Theory &    Anthropology 148A Comparative Ethnicity
     *  Anthropology 172 Colonialism and Culture     *  Art History 186AA-ZZ Seminar in Advanced Studies in Art History
 &     Asian American Studies 100CC Filipino Americans &    Asian American Studies 100DD Korean Americans                                                          
 &    Asian American Studies 109 Asian American Women and Work &     Asian American Studies 113 The Asian American Movement
 & *  Asian American Studies 121 Asian American Autobiographies and                           Biographies
 &    Asian American Studies 124 Asian American Literature in Comparative           Frameworks
     *  Asian American Studies 134 Asian American Men and Contemporary                          Men’s Issues
 &    Asian American Studies 138   Asian American Sexualities                                                 &    Asian American Studies 148 Introduction to Video Production
 &    Asian American Studies 149 Screenwriting &    Black Studies 50   Blacks in the Media                                                        
 &     Black  Studies  108    Obama  as  a  Political  and  Cultural  Phenomenon                              @& *  Black Studies 137E Sociology of the Black Experience
 &    Chicano Studies 168E History of the Chicano Movement &    Chicano Studies 168F Racism in American History
 &    Chicano Studies 171 The Brown/Black Metropolis: Race, Class, &              Resistance in the City
 &    Chicano Studies 189 Immigration and the US Border     *  Chinese 132B Special Topics in Modern Chinese Poetry
     *  Chinese 150 The Language of Vernacular Chinese           Literature
     *  Chinese 166B Taoist Traditions in China     *  Chinese 166C Confucian Tradition: The Classical Period
     *  Communication 130 Political Communication     *  Communication 137 Global Communication, International
              Relations and the Media     *  Communication 150 Group Communication in Multiple Contexts
     *  Communication 153 Communication and Global Advocacy      *  Comparative Literature 36 Global Humanities: The Politics and Poetics 
               of  Witnessing     *  Comparative Literature 170 Literary Translation: Theory and Practice
     *  Counseling, Clinical & School Introduction to Applied Psychology               Psychology 101
     *  Earth Science 6 Mountains, Boots and Backpacks: Field Study                 of the High Sierra
     *  Earth Science 104A Field Studies in Geological Methods     *  Earth Science 104B Field Methods
     *  Earth Science 117 Earth Surface Processes and Landforms     *  Earth Science 123 The Solar System
     *  Earth Science 130 Global Warming - Science and Society     *  East Asian Cultural Studies 178 The Body Religious in Chinese Culture
     *  Economics 117A Law and Economics     *  Education 20 Introduction to the University Experience 
     *  EEMB 124 Biochemical Ecology     *  EEMB 134 Biology of Seaweeds and Phytoplankton
     *  EEMB 135 Evolutionary Ecology     *  EEMB 138 Ethology and Behavioral Ecology
     *  EEMB 142BL Chemical and Physical Methods of Aquatic              Environments      
     *  EEMB 142CL Methods of Aquatic Biology
   *  EEMB 149 Mariculture for the Twenty-first Century     *  EEMB 179 Modeling Environmental and Ecological
              Change     *  English 36 Global Humanities
     *  Engineering 101 Ethics in Engineering     *  Environmental Studies 2 Introduction to Environmental Science
     *  Environmental Studies 20 Shoreline Issues     *  Environmental Studies 110 Disease and the Environment
     *  Environmental Studies 143 Endangered Species Management     *  Environmental Studies 146 Animals in Human Society: Ethical Issues  
                of Animal Use     *  Environmental Studies 161 Environmental Journalism: A Survey
@       Environmental Studies 173 American Environmental History & *  Environmental Studies 189 Religion and Ecology in the Americas
     *  Feminist Studies 80 or 80H Introduction to LGBTQ Studies & *  Feminist Studies 142 Black Women Filmmakers
     *  Feminist Studies 150, 150H Sex, Love, and Romance     *  Feminist Studies 154A Sociology of the Family
@       Feminist Studies 155A Women in American Society     *  Feminist Studies 162 Critical LGBTQ Studies
     *  Film Studies 101A-B-C History of Cinema     *  Film Studies 146 Advanced Film Analysis
     *  Film Studies 191 Film Criticism     *  Geography 8 Living with Global Warming
      *  Geography  148 California     *  Geography 180 Geography of the Information Society
     *  History 56 Introduction to Mexican History     *  History 123A Europe in the Nineteenth Century
     *  History 123B Europe in War and Revolution     *  History 123C Europe Since Hitler
     *  History 140A-B Early Modern Britain     *  History 155A-B History of Portugal
     *  History 156A History of Mexico     *  History 156I Indians of Mexico
     *  History 157A-B History of Brazil@&    History 160A-B The American South
@       History 164C Civil War and Reconstruction@& *  History 164IA-IB American Immigration
@       History 165 America in the Gilded Age, 1876 to 1900@       History 166A-B-C United States in the Twentieth Century
@       History 166LB United States Legal History &    History 168E History of the Chicano Movement
 & *  History 168M Middle Eastern Americans & *  History 168N Interracial Intimacy
@       History 169M History of Afro-American Thought@       History 173T American Environmental History
@         History  176A-B The  American  West@       History 177 History of California
@       History 178A-B American Urban History@& *  History 179A Native American History to 1838
@&    History 179B Native American History, 1838 to Present     *  Japanese 25 Violence and the State in Japan
     *  Japanese 167A Religion in Japanese Culture     *  Latin American and Iberian Introduction to the Latin American and  
               Studies 10  Iberian World     *  Latin American and Iberian  Introduction to Latin American and Iberian 
            Studies 100  Studies     *  Linguistics 113 Introduction to Semantics
     *  Linguistics 114 Advanced Phonology      *  Linguistics  131 Sociolinguistics
     *  Linguistics 137 Introduction to First Language Acquisition     *  Linguistics 138 Language Socialization
     *  Materials 10 Materials in Society: The Stuff of Dreams     *  Molecular, Cellular, and 
               Developmental Biology 134H Animal Virology– Honors     *  Molecular, Cellular, and 
             Developmental Biology 149 Mariculture for the 21st Century     *  Music 12 Introduction to Music Literature
     *  Music 112AB-C-D-E-F History of Music     *  Philosophy 7 Biomedical Ethics
     *  Physics 13AH Honors Experimental Physics     *  Physics 128AL-BL Advanced Experimental Physics
     *  Political Science 6 Introduction to Comparative Politics     *  Political Science 7 Introduction to International Relations
@  *  Political Science 127 American Foreign Policy     *  Political Science 129 The United States, Europe, and Asia in the 
              Twenty-First Century
----------------Page (20) Break----------------
20 • GENERAL EDUCATION
*   This course applies toward the writing requirement. @ This course applies toward the American History & Institutions requirement.
&  This course applies toward the ethnicity requirement.  ^  This course applies toward the European Traditions requirement.
@       Political Science 152 American Political Parties@       Political Science 153 Political Interest Groups
@       Political Science 157 The American Presidency@       Political Science 158 Power in Washington
@       Political Science 162 Urban Government and Politics@       Political Science 165 Criminal Justice
@       Political Science 167 Constitutional Law: The Bill of Rights@       Political Science 180 Bureaucracy and Public Policy
@  *  Political Science 185 Government and the Economy     *  Psychology 90A-B-C First-Level Honors Seminar
     *  Psychology 110L Laboratory in Perception     *  Psychology 111L Laboratory in Biopsychology
     *  Psychology 112L Laboratory in Social Behavior     *  Psychology 116L Laboratory in Animal Learning
     *  Psychology 117L Laboratory in Human Memory and Cognition     *  Psychology 118L Laboratory in Attention
     *  Psychology 120L Advanced Research Laboratory     *  Psychology 135A-B-C Field Experience in Psychological Settings
     *  Psychology 143S Seminar in Social Development     *  Religious Studies 106 Modernity and the Process of Secularization
 & *  Religious Studies 110D Ritual Art and Verbal Art of the Pacific                         Northwest
 & *  Religious Studies 114D  Religion and Healing in Native America             *      *  Religious Studies 127B Christian Thought and Cultures of the                                      
                Middle Ages & *  Religious Studies 131F The History of Anti-Semitism
     *  Religious Studies 131J Introduction to Rabbinic Literature     *  Religious Studies 140A Islamic Traditions
       *   Religious Studies 140B      Religion, Politics, and Society in the Persian                                                               Gulf Region
     *  Religious Studies 140C Islamic Mysticism and Religious Thought &    Religious Studies 140E Islam in America
     *  Religious Studies 145 Patterns in Comparative Religion     *  Religious Studies 166C Confucian Traditions: The Classical Period
     *  Religious Studies 167A Religion in Japanese Culture & *  Religious Studies 193 Religion and Ecology of the Americas
 & *  Sociology 128 Interethnic Relations     *  Sociology 130 Development and its Alternatives
     *  Sociology 130LA Development and Social Change in Latin                                          America
     *  Sociology 130ME Development and Social Change in the                                                  Middle East
     *  Sociology 134R The Sociology of Revolutions     *  Sociology 134RC Radical Social Change
@& *  Sociology 137E Sociology of the Black Experience &    Sociology 139A Black and White Relations
@       Sociology 140 Aging in American Society     *  Sociology 154A Sociology of the Family
 & *  Sociology 154F The Chicano Family@       Sociology 155A Women in American Society
 & *  Sociology 155M Contemporary U.S. Women’s Movements &    Sociology 155W Chicanas and Mexican Women in 
              Contemporary Society     *  Sociology 156A Introduction to Women, Culture, and                                        
          Development@       Sociology 157 Radicalism in Contemporary Life
     *  Sociology 170 Sociology of Deviant Behavior     *  Sociology 176A Sociology of AIDS
 &    Spanish 109 Spanish in the United States: The                                                            Language and its Speakers
     *  Speech & Hearing Sciences 50 Introduction to Communication Disorders      *  Theater  1 Play  Analysis
     *  Theater 91 Summer Theater in Orientation &     Theater  180F Asian  American  Theater
      *  Theater  185TH Theory    *  Writing 110L Advanced Legal Writing
    *  Writing 110MK Professional Communications in                                                             Marketing and Public Relations
     *  Writing 160 Theory and Practice of Writing Center                                               Consulting
Stork Tower; UCSB campus
----------------Page (21) Break----------------
21GENERAL EDUCATION •  
@       Political Science 152 American Political Parties@       Political Science 153 Political Interest Groups
@       Political Science 157 The American Presidency@       Political Science 158 Power in Washington
@       Political Science 162 Urban Government and Politics@       Political Science 165 Criminal Justice
@       Political Science 167 Constitutional Law: The Bill of Rights@       Political Science 180 Bureaucracy and Public Policy
@  *  Political Science 185 Government and the Economy     *  Psychology 90A-B-C First-Level Honors Seminar
     *  Psychology 110L Laboratory in Perception     *  Psychology 111L Laboratory in Biopsychology
     *  Psychology 112L Laboratory in Social Behavior     *  Psychology 116L Laboratory in Animal Learning
     *  Psychology 117L Laboratory in Human Memory and Cognition     *  Psychology 118L Laboratory in Attention
     *  Psychology 120L Advanced Research Laboratory     *  Psychology 135A-B-C Field Experience in Psychological Settings
     *  Psychology 143S Seminar in Social Development     *  Religious Studies 106 Modernity and the Process of Secularization
 & *  Religious Studies 110D Ritual Art and Verbal Art of the Pacific                         Northwest
 & *  Religious Studies 114D  Religion and Healing in Native America             *      *  Religious Studies 127B Christian Thought and Cultures of the                                      
                Middle Ages & *  Religious Studies 131F The History of Anti-Semitism
     *  Religious Studies 131J Introduction to Rabbinic Literature     *  Religious Studies 140A Islamic Traditions
       *   Religious Studies 140B      Religion, Politics, and Society in the Persian                                                               Gulf Region
     *  Religious Studies 140C Islamic Mysticism and Religious Thought &    Religious Studies 140E Islam in America
     *  Religious Studies 145 Patterns in Comparative Religion     *  Religious Studies 166C Confucian Traditions: The Classical Period
     *  Religious Studies 167A Religion in Japanese Culture & *  Religious Studies 193 Religion and Ecology of the Americas
 & *  Sociology 128 Interethnic Relations     *  Sociology 130 Development and its Alternatives
     *  Sociology 130LA Development and Social Change in Latin                                          America
     *  Sociology 130ME Development and Social Change in the                                                  Middle East
     *  Sociology 134R The Sociology of Revolutions     *  Sociology 134RC Radical Social Change
@& *  Sociology 137E Sociology of the Black Experience &    Sociology 139A Black and White Relations
@       Sociology 140 Aging in American Society     *  Sociology 154A Sociology of the Family
 & *  Sociology 154F The Chicano Family@       Sociology 155A Women in American Society
 & *  Sociology 155M Contemporary U.S. Women’s Movements &    Sociology 155W Chicanas and Mexican Women in 
              Contemporary Society     *  Sociology 156A Introduction to Women, Culture, and                                        
          Development@       Sociology 157 Radicalism in Contemporary Life
     *  Sociology 170 Sociology of Deviant Behavior     *  Sociology 176A Sociology of AIDS
 &    Spanish 109 Spanish in the United States: The                                                            Language and its Speakers
     *  Speech & Hearing Sciences 50 Introduction to Communication Disorders      *  Theater  1 Play  Analysis
     *  Theater 91 Summer Theater in Orientation &     Theater  180F Asian  American  Theater
      *  Theater  185TH Theory    *  Writing 110L Advanced Legal Writing
    *  Writing 110MK Professional Communications in                                                             Marketing and Public Relations
     *  Writing 160 Theory and Practice of Writing Center                                               Consulting
CheCKlist oF generAl uniVersitY And generAl eduCAtion reQuirements
GENERAL UNIVERSITY REQUIREMENTSUC Entry Level Writing Requirement  –  (Must be fulfilled within three 
quarters of admission.)
Passed Exam    or Writing 1, 1E or Ling 12            or transferred appropriate course   
American History and Institutions*  –   (Refer to page 8 for the list of acceptable courses.)
One course     or   Advanced Placement    or International waiver               
  *This course may also apply to the General Education requirements, if appropriate.
GENERAL EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS
No more than two courses total from the same department may apply to the General Education Areas D, E, F, G, and H.  A 
course listed in more than one General Subject Area can be applied to only one area. Course total in Areas D, E, F, G, and H must 
be at least 6.
General Subject Areas
1. Area A:  English Reading and Composition
 Writing 2 or 2E                                 and      Writing 50, 50E, 107T or 109ST    
2. Areas D and E:  Social Sciences, Culture and Thought  (2 courses minimum)
  
                               
3. Areas F and G:  Arts and Literature (2 courses minimum)
        
                                                  
 
4. Two additional courses from D, E, F, G, or H (Foreign Language):
                                                 
 
Special Subject Areas
In the process of fulfilling the G.E. General Subject Area requirements, students must fulfill the following Special Subject Area 
requirements, as outlined on page 11.  Only approved courses can be used to fulfill these requirements.  
a. Writing Requirement At least four courses which require the writing of one or more papers totaling at least 
1,800 words.
                            
  
b. Depth Requirement – Choose one of the following options:
 Option 1: At least two upper division courses from two separate departments, in each of which a course has
  already been completed. (Only courses from Areas D, E, F, G or H may be used towards this requirement.)
         Course 1 (Lower or Upper Division)        Course 2 (Upper Division)
   Department 1                                    
   Department 2                                               
 Option 2: Complete a Three Course Sequence from the approved list on page 11.
              
 Option 3: Complete an approved minor or double major, see page 11 for more information about this option.
        
 
c. Ethnicity Requirement – (1 course)              
d. European Traditions Requirement – (1 course) ________________               
----------------Page (22) Break----------------
22 • CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
Chemical 
Engineering
Department of Chemical Engineering,  Engineering II, Room 3357; 
Telephone (805) 893-3412 Web site: www.chemengr.ucsb.edu
Chair: Rachel A. Segalman Vice-Chairs: Todd M. Squires
       M. Scott Shell       
Faculty
Bradley Chmelka, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (self-assembled materials,  
heterogeneous catalysis, surfactants and polymers, porous and composite solids, 
magnetic resonance)
Michael F. Doherty, Ph.D., Cambridge University, Professor (process design and 
synthesis, separations, crystal engineering)
Glenn Fredrickson, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor (polymer theory, block 
copolymers, phase transitions, statistical mechanics, glass transitions, composite 
media)
Michael J. Gordon, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Associate Professor 
(surface physics, scanning probe microscopy, nanoscale materials, plasmonics, laser 
spectroscopy)
Matthew E. Helgeson, Ph.D., University of Delaware, Assistant Professor (colloidal 
thermodynamics and rheology, polymer and surfactant self-assembly, nanomaterials, 
microfluidics) 
Jacob Israelachvili, Ph.D., University of Cambridge, Professor (surface and interfacial 
phenomena, adhesion, colloidal systems, surface forces, bio-adhesion, friction) 
*1
L. Gary Leal, Ph.D., Stanford University, Schlinger Distinguished Professor in Chemical 
Engineering (fluid mechanics, physics of complex fluids, rheology)
Eric McFarland, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, M.D., Harvard , 
Professor (energy production, catalysis, 
reaction engineering, charge and energy transfer)
Samir Mitragotri, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (drug 
delivery and diagnostics, bio-membrane transport, membrane biophysics, biomedical 
ultrasound)
Michelle A. O’Malley, Ph.D., University of Delaware, Assistant Professor (genetic 
and cellular engineering, membrane protein characterization for drug discovery, protein 
biophysics, metagenomics, biofuel production) 
Baron G. Peters, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Associate Professor (molecular simulation, 
chemical kinetics, catalytic reaction mechanisms, nucleation, electron transfer)
Susannah Scott, Ph.D., Iowa State University, Professor (heterogeneous 
catalysis, surface organometallic chemistry; analysis of electronic structure and 
stoichiometric reactivity to determine catalytic function ) 
*3
Rachel A. Segalman, Ph.D., UC Santa 
Barbara, Professor (polymer design, self-assembly, and properties) 
*1
M. Scott Shell, Ph.D. Princeton, Associate Professor (molecular simulation, statistical 
mechanics, complex materials, protein biophysics)
Todd M. Squires, Ph.D., Harvard, Associate Professor (fluid mechanics, microfluidics, 
microrheology, complex fluids)
*1 Joint appointment with Materials*2 Joint appointment with Mechanical Engineering
*3 Joint appointment with Chemistry and Biochemistry
Emeriti Faculty
Sanjoy Banerjee, Ph.D., University of Waterloo, Professor Emeritus (transport 
processes, multiphase systems, process safety) 
*2
Owen T. Hanna, Ph.D., Purdue University, Professor Emeritus (theoretical methods)
Gene Lucas, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (structural materials, 
mechanical properties) *2
Duncan A. Mellichamp, Ph.D., Purdue University, Professor Emeritus (process 
dynamics and control, digital computer control)
Robert G. Rinker, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Professor Emeritus (chemical 
kinetics, reaction engineering, catalysis)
Orville C. Sandall, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor Emeritus (transport of mass, 
energy, and momentum; separation processes)
Dale E. Seborg, Ph.D., Princeton University, Professor Emeritus (process dynamics and 
control, monitoring and fault detection, system identification)
Theofanis G. Theofanous, Ph.D., University of Minnesota, Professor, Center for Risk 
Studies and Safety Director (transport phenomena in multiphase systems, risk 
analysis) *2
Affiliated Faculty
Song-I Han, Ph.D. (Chemistry)
Philip Alan Pincus, Ph.D. (Materials)
We live in a technological society which 
provides many benefits including a very 
high standard of living. However, our 
society must address critical problems that 
have strong technological aspects. These 
problems include: meeting our energy re-
quirements, safeguarding the environment, 
ensuring national security, and delivering 
health care at an affordable cost. Because 
of their broad technical background, chemi-
cal engineers are uniquely qualified to 
make major contributions to the resolution 
of these and other important problems. 
Chemical engineers develop processes 
and products that transform raw materials 
into useful products. 
The Department of Chemical Engi-
neering offers the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. 
degrees in chemical engineering. The B.S. 
degree is accredited by the Engineering 
Accreditation Commission of ABET, http://www.abet.org
. 
At the undergraduate level, emphasis 
is placed on a thorough background in 
the fundamental principles of science and 
engineering, strongly reinforced by labora-
tory courses in which students become 
familiar with the application of theory. At 
the graduate level, students take advanced 
courses and are required to demonstrate 
competence in conducting basic and ap-
plied research. 
The B.S. degree provides excellent 
preparation for both challenging industrial 
jobs and graduate degree programs. 
Interdisciplinary B.S./M.S degree pro-
grams are also available which result in 
M.S. degrees in other fields. Students who 
complete a major in chemical engineer-
ing may be eligible to pursue a California 
teaching credential. Interested students 
should consult the credential advisor in the 
Graduate School of Education as soon as 
possible. 
Under the direction of the Associate 
Dean for Undergraduate Studies, academic 
advising services are jointly provided by 
advisors in the College of Engineering, as 
well as advisors in the department. Each 
undergraduate also is assigned a faculty 
advisor, to assist in selection of elective 
courses, plan academic programs, and 
provide advice on professional career 
objectives. Undergraduates in other majors 
who plan to change to a major in the De-
partment of Chemical Engineering should 
consult the department academic advisor 
for the requirements. 
Mission Statement
The program in Chemical Engineering has 
a dual mission: 
• Education. Our program seeks to pro-
duce chemical engineers who will con-
tribute to the process industries world-
wide. Our program provides students 
with a strong fundamental technical 
education designed to meet the needs 
of a changing and rapidly developing 
technological environment. 
• Research. Our program seeks to de-
velop innovative science and technology 
that addresses the needs of industry, the 
scientific community, and society.
Objectives for the Undergraduate 
Program
Educational Objectives 
• Our graduates will be innovative, compe-
tent, contributing chemical engineers. 
• Our graduates will demonstrate their 
flexibility and adaptability in the work-
place, so that they remain effective 
engineers, take on new responsibilities, 
and assume leadership roles. 
• Our graduates will continually develop 
new skills and knowledge through formal 
and informal mechanisms. 
Student Learning Outcomes 
Upon graduation, students from the ChE 
program at UCSB are expected to have: 
----------------Page (23) Break----------------
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING • 23
1. [Fundamentals] the fundamental 
knowledge of mathematics, computing, 
science, and engineering needed to 
practice chemical engineering, and the 
ability to apply this knowledge to identify, 
formulate, and solve chemical engineer-
ing problems; 
2. [Laboratory] the ability to design and 
conduct experiments and to analyze and 
interpret data; 
3. [Design] the ability to design a system, 
component, or process to meet desired 
specifications, while recognizing, assess-
ing and mitigating potential hazards; the 
ability to use modern engineering tools 
necessary for engineering practice; 
4. [Advanced Training] knowledge be-
yond the basic fundamentals in chemi-
cal engineering and/or related technical 
fields as preparation for a continuing 
process of lifelong learning, a recognition 
of the need for and the ability to engage 
in lifelong learning; 
5. [Teamwork/Communication] the ability 
to function productively in multidisci-
plinary teams working towards common 
goals; the ability to communicate ef-
fectively through written reports and oral 
presentations; 
6. [Engineering & Society] the broad 
education necessary to understand the 
impact of engineering solutions in a 
global/societal context; a knowledge of 
contemporary issues; an understanding 
of professional and ethical responsibility. 
Undergraduate Program
Bachelor of Science—Chemical 
Engineering
A minimum of 194 units is required for 
graduation. A complete list of requirements 
for the major can be found on page 46. 
Schedules should be planned to meet both 
General Education and major require-
ments. Courses required for the major, 
inside or outside of the Department of 
Chemical Engineering, cannot be taken 
for the pass/not pass grading option. They 
must be taken for letter grades.
Twelve units of technical electives se-
lected from a wide variety of upper-division 
science and engineering courses are also 
required. The list of approved technical 
electives is included on curriculum sheets. 
Prior approval of technical electives must 
be obtained from the department faculty 
advisor and the technical elective work-
sheet must be submitted to the department 
by fall quarter of the senior year. 
Transfer students who have completed 
most of the lower-division courses listed 
above and are entering the junior year of 
the chemical engineering program may 
take Chemical Engineering 10 concurrently 
with Chemical Engineering 120A in the fall 
quarter.
Chemical 
Engineering 
Courses
LOWER DIVISION
1A. Engineering and the Scientific Method(1) STAFF
Engineering and its relationship to basic science, with specific examples from engineering practice. 
Analysis and synthesis of engineering education. Career opportunities for chemical engineering 
graduates. Seminar/discussion format with guest lecturers and current experiences/issues from 
students’ other freshman engineering/science classes.
5. Introduction to Chemical Engineering Design
(3) DOHERTYIntroduction to the design and analysis of 
processes involving chemical change in the context of chemical and biomolecular engineering. Students 
learn mathematical, empirical, and conceptual strategies to analyze.
10. Introduction to Chemical Engineering(3) HELGESON, GORDON
Prerequisites: Chemistry 1A-B-C or 2A-B-C; Mathematics 3A-B or Mathematics 4A; and 
Engineering 3; chemical engineering majors only.Elementary principles of chemical engineering. 
The major topics discussed include material and energy balances, stoichiometry, and thermodynamics.
99. Introduction to Research(1-3) STAFF
Prerequisites: consent of instructor and undergraduate advisor. 
May be repeated for credit to a maximum of 6 units. Students are limited to 5 units per quarter and 
30 units total in all 98/99/198/199/199DC/199RA courses combined.
Directed study, normally experimental, to be arranged with individual faculty members. Course 
offers exceptional students an opportunity to participate in a research group.
UPPER DIVISION
102. Biomaterials and Biosurfaces(3) ISRAELACHVILI
Recommended Preparation: Basic physical chemistry, chemistry, physics, thermodynamics and 
biology.Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Chemical Engineering 121.Fundamentals of natural and artificial 
biomaterials and biosurfaces with emphasis on molecular level structure and function and the 
interactions of biomaterials and surfaces with the body. Design issues of grafts and biopolymers. Basic 
biological and biochemical systems reviewed for nonbiologists.
107. Introduction to Biological Processing(3) O’MALLEY
Prerequisites:  Chemical Engineering 10Familiarizes engineering students with biological 
processing and production at multiple scales. Chemical engineering principles will be infused with 
key biological concepts, including an introduction to biochemistry, cell biology, and molecular biology.
110A. Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
(3) SHELLPrerequisite: Chemical Engineering 10; Mathematics 
4B; Engineering majors only.Use of the laws of thermodynamics to analyze 
processes encountered in engineering practice, including cycles and flows. Equations-of-state 
for describing properties of fluids and mixtures. Applications, including engines, turbines, 
refrigeration and power plant cycles, phase equilibria, and chemical-reaction equilibria.
110B. Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
(3) STAFFPrerequisite: Chemical Engineering 110A with a 
minimum grade of C-; Mathematics 4B; Engineering majors only.
Extension of Chemical Engineering 110A to cover mixtures and multiphase equilibrium. Liquid-
vapor separations calculations are emphasized. Introduction to equations of state for mixtures.
119. Current Events in Chemical Engineering(1) STAFF
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 110A-B.Assigned readings in technical journals on 
current events of interest to chemical engineers. Student groups present oral reports on reading 
assignments pertaining to new technologies, discoveries, industry challenges, society/government 
issues, professional and ethical responsibilities.
120A. Transport Processes(4) SQUIRES, MITAGOTRI
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 10 with a minimum grade of C- (may be taken concurrently); 
Mathematics 4B; Mathematics 6A-B.Introductory course in conceptual understanding 
and mathematical analysis of problems in fluid dynamics of relevance to Chemical Engineering. 
Emphasis is placed on performing microscopic and macroscopic mathematical analysis to understand 
fluid motion in response to forces.
120B. Transport Processes(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: Chemical Engineering 10 with minimum grade of C-; Chemical Engineering 110A with 
minimum grade of C- (may be taken concurrently); Chemical Engineering 120A.
Introductory course in the mathematical analysis of conductive, convective and radiative heat 
transfer with practical applications to design of heat exchange equipment and use. 
120C. Transport Processes(3) PETERS
Prerequisite: Chemical Engineering 10 with a minimum grade of C-; Chemical Engineering 110A 
with minimum grade of C-; Chemical Engineering 110B (may be taken concurrently) and Chemical 
Engineering 120B.Introductory course in the fundamentals of mass 
transfer with applications to the design of mass transfer equipment. 
121. Colloids and Biosurfaces(3) ISRAELACHVILI
Recommended Preparation: Basic physical chemistry, chemistry, physics, thermodynamics and 
biology.Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Chemical Engineering 102.Basic forces and interactions between atoms, 
molecules, small particles and extended surfaces. Special features and interactions associated 
with (soft) biological molecules, biomaterials and surfaces: lipids, proteins, fibrous molecules (DNA), 
biological membranes, hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions, bio-specific and non-equilibrium 
interactions.
124. Advanced Topics in Transport Phenomena/Safety
(3) THEOFANOUSPrerequisites: Chemical Engineering 120A-B-C or 
Mechanical Engineering 151A-B; and Mechanical Engineering 152A.
Same course as ME 124.Hazard identification and assessments, runaway 
reactions, emergency relief. Plant accidents and safety issues. Dispersion and consequences of 
releases.
125. Principles of Bioengineering(3) MITRAGOTRI
Applications of engineering to biological and medical systems. Introduction to drug delivery, 
tissue engineering, and modern biomedical devices. Design and applications of these systems are 
discussed. 
----------------Page (24) Break----------------
24 • CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
126. Non-Newtonian Fluids, Soft Materials and Chemical Products
(3) SQUIRES, HELGESONPrerequisite: Chemical Engineering 120C
     Overview of soft materials (suspensions, gels, polymers, surfactants, emulsions, powders and 
granules) that arise in diverse industries, including consumer products, foods, advanced materials, 
biotechnology, and mineral and energy production. Influence of non-Newtonian rheology (shear- 
thickening and thinning, viscoelasticity, extension- thickening, yield stresses, normal stress differences, 
and metastability) upon handling, processing, production, and performance of chemical 
products. Strategies to design chemical products that meet performance targets, and to scale-up 
production. Real-world case studies and classroom demonstrations.
128. Separation Processes(3) SCOTT
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 10 and 110A-B; open to College of Engineering majors only.
Basic principles and design techniques of equilibrium-stage separation processes. Emphasis is 
placed on binary distillation, liquid-liquid extraction, and multicomponent distillation.
132A. Analytical Methods in Chemical Engineering
(4) FREDRICKSON, GORDONPrerequisites: Mathematics 4B; Mathematics 6A.
Develop analytical tools to solve elementary partial differential equations and boundary value 
problems. Separation of variables, Laplace transforms, Sturm- Liouville theory, generalized 
Fourier analysis, and computer math tools.
132B. Computational Methods in Chemical Engineering
(3) FREDRICKSON, GORDONPrerequisite: Mathematics 4B; Mathematics 6A-B.
Numerical methods for solution of linear and nonlinear algebraic equations, optimization, 
interpolation, numerical integration and differentiation, initial- value problems in ordinary and 
partial differential equations, and boundary- value problems. Emphasis on computational tools for 
chemical engineering applications. 
132C. Statistical Methods in Chemical Engineering
(3) PETERSPrerequisites: Mathematics 4B; Mathematics 6A-B.
Probability concepts and distributions, random variables, error analysis, point estimation 
and confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, development of empirical chemical engineering 
models using regression techniques, design of experiments, process monitoring based on statistical 
quality control techniques.
140A. Chemical Reaction Engineering(3) MCFARLAND, SCOTT
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 10 with minimum grade of C-; Chemical Engineering 110A 
with a minimum grade of C-; Chemical Engineering 110B (may be taken concurrently). Chemical 
Engineering 120A-B.Fundamentals of chemical reaction engineering 
with emphasis on kinetics of homogenous and heterogeneous reacting systems. Reaction rates and 
reaction design are linked to chemical conversion and selectivity. Batch and continuous reactor 
designs with and without catalysts are examined.
140B. Chemical Reaction Engineering(3) CHMELKA, MCFARLAND
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 110A-B, 120A-B and 140A. 
Thermodynamics, kinetics, mass and energy transport considerations associated with complex 
homogeneous and heterogeneous reacting systems. Catalysts and catalytic reaction rates 
and mechanisms. Adsorption and reaction at solid surfaces, including effects of diffusion in porous 
materials. Chemical reactors using heterogeneous catalysts.
141. The Science and Engineering of Energy Conversion
(3) MCFARLANDPrerequisite: Chemical Engineering 110A and 140A.
Equivalent upper-division coursework in thermodynamics and kinetics from outside of 
department will be considered.Framework for understanding the energy supply 
issues facing society with a focus on the science, engineering, and economic principles of the major 
alternatives. Emphasis will be on the physical and chemical fundamentals of energy conversion 
technologies. 
152A. Process Dynamics and Control(4) DOYLE
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 120A-B-C and 140A. 
Development of theoretical and empirical models for chemical and physical processes, dynamic 
behavior of processes, transfer function and block diagram representation, process instrumentation, 
control system design and analysis, stability analysis, computer simulation of controlled 
processes.
152B. Advanced Process Control  (3) DOYLE
Prerequisite: Chemical Engineering 152A. The theory, design, and experimental application 
of advanced process control strategies including feedforward control, cascade control, enhanced 
single- loop strategies, and model predictive control. Analysis of multi-loop control systems. Introduction 
to on-line optimization.
154. Engineering Approaches to Systems Biology
(3) STAFFPrerequisite: Chemical Engineering 170
Applications of engineering tools and methods to solve problems in systems biology. Emphasis 
is placed on integrative approaches that address multi-scale and multi-rate phenomena in biological 
regulation. Modeling, optimization, and sensitivity analysis tools are introduced. 
160. Introduction to Polymer Science(3) KRAMER
Prerequisite: Chemistry 109A-B.Same course as Materials 160.
Introductory course covering synthesis, characterization, structure, and mechanical 
properties of polymers. The course is taught from a materials perspective and includes polymer 
thermodynamics, chain architecture, measurement and control of molecular weight as well as 
crystallization and glass transitions. 
170. Molecular and Cellular Biology for Engineers
(3) O’MALLEYPrerequisite: Chemical Engineering 120A-B-C, 140A 
and Chemistry 109C. Familiarizes engineering students with key 
concepts from biochemistry, molecular biology, cell biology, and genetics. Students will apply chemical 
engineering principles to describe different biological systems at multiple scales, including an introduction 
to bioproduction. 
171. Introduction to Biochemical Engineering(3) DAUGHERTY
Prerequisite: Chemical Engineering 170.Introduction to biochemical engineering covering 
cell growth kinetics, bioreactor design,enzyme processes, biotechnologies for modification of 
cellular information, and molecular and cellular engineering. 
179. Biotechnology Laboratory(4) DAUGHERTY
Prerequisite: Chemical Engineering 170 or MCDB 1A or Chemistry 142A-B or Consent of Instructor.
Must have an overall grade point average of 3.3 or above.
This course will provide an introduction to theoretical principles and practical methods used 
in modern biotechnology, genetic engineering, and synthetic biology. Topics will include protein 
and cellular engineering using recombinant DNA technologies, mutagenesis, library construction, and 
biosynthetic display technologies. 
180A Chemical Engineering Laboratory(3) STAFF
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 110A and 120A-B.
Experiments in thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, mass transfer, and chemical 
processing. Analysis of results, and preparation of reports.
180B Chemical Engineering Laboratory(3) STAFF
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 120C, 128, 140A, and 152A.
Experiments in mass transfer, reactor kinetics, process control, and chemical and biochemical 
processing. Analysis of results, and preparation of reports.
184A. Design of Chemical Processes(3) DOHERTY, CHMELKA
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 110A-B, 120A-B-C,128, 132B, 140A-B, and 152A.
Application of chemical engineering principles to plant design. Conceptual design of chemical 
processes. Flowsheeting methods. Engineering cost principles and economic aspects.
184B. Design of Chemical Processes(3) DOHERTY
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 184A. The solution to comprehensive plant design 
problems. Use of computer process simulators. Optimization of plant design, investment and 
operations.6
196. Undergraduate Research(2-4) STAFF
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing, completion of 2 upper-division courses in Chemical Engineering; 
consent of the instructor. Must have a minimum 3.0 grade-point average 
for the preceding three quarters. May be repeated for up to 12 units. Not more than 3 units may be 
applied to departmental electives.Research opportunities for undergraduate 
students. Students will be expected to give regular oral presentations, actively participate in a weekly 
seminar, and prepare at least one written report on their research.
198. Independent Studies in Chemical Engineering
(1-5) STAFFPrerequisites: consent of instructor; upper-division 
standing; completion of two upper-division courses in chemical engineering. 
Must have a minimum 3.0 grade-point-average for the preceding three quarters. May be 
repeated up to twelve units. Students are limited to five units per quarter and 30 units total in all 
98/99/198/199/199DC/199RA courses combined.Directed individual studies.
GRADUATE COURSES
Graduate courses for this major can be found in the UCSB General Catalog.
----------------Page (25) Break----------------
COMPUTER ENGINEERING • 25
Computer 
Engineering
Computer Engineering Major, Trailer 380, Room 101; 
Telephone (805) 893-5615 E-mail: info@ce.ucsb.edu
Web site: www.ce.ucsb.edu
Director: Li-C. Wang Associate Director: Forrest Brewer
Faculty
Kevin Almeroth, Ph.D., Georgia Institute of Technology, Professor (computer networks 
and protocols, large-scale multimedia systems, performance evaluation and 
distributed systems)
Kaustav Banerjee, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (high performance VLSI and mixed 
signal system-on-chip designs and their design automation methods; single electron 
transistors; 3D and optoelectronic integration)
Forrest D. Brewer, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Professor (VLSI 
and computer system design automation, theory of design and design representations, 
symbolic techniques in high level synthesis)
Tevfik Bultan, Ph.D., University of Maryland, College Park, Professor (specification and 
automated analysis of concurrent systems, computer-aided verification, model checking)
Alberto Giovanni G. Busetto, Ph.D., ETH Zurich, Switzerland, Assistant Professor 
(machine learning, adaptive systems, experimental design, systems biology)
Kwang-Ting (Tim) Cheng, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (design automation, VLSI 
testing, design synthesis, design verification, algorithms)
Chandra Krintz, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego, Professor (dynamic 
and adaptive compilation systems, high-performance internet (mobile) computing, 
runtime and compiler optimizations for Java/CIL, efficient mobile program transfer formats)
Malgorzata Marek-Sadowska, Ph.D., Technical University of Warsaw, Poland, 
Professor (design automation, computer-aided design, integrated circuit layout, logic 
synthesis)
Behrooz Parhami, Ph.D., UC Los Angeles, Professor (parallel architectures and 
algorithms, computer arithmetic, computer design, dependable and fault-tolerant 
computing)
Tim Sherwood, Ph.D., UC San Diego, Professor (computer architecture, dynamic 
optimization, network and security processors, embedded systems, program analysis and 
characterization, and hardware support of 
software systems)
Dmitri B. Strukov, Ph.D., Stony Brook University, Assistant Professor (hybrid circuits, 
nanoelectronics, resistance switching devices, memristors, digital memories, programmable 
circuits, bio-inspired computing)
Luke Theogarajan, Ph.D., Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Associate Professor (low-power analog VLSI, biomimetic 
nanosystems, neural prostheses, biosensors, block co-polymer synthesis, self-assembly, 
and microfabrication)
Li-C. Wang, Ph.D., University of Texas at Austin, Professor (design verification, testing, 
computer-aided design of microprocessors)
Richard Wolski, Ph.D., UC Davis/Livermore, Professor (high-performance distributed 
computing, computational grids, computational economies for resource allocation and 
scheduling)
Yuan Xie, Ph.D., Princeton University, Professor (EDA, VLSI design, computer 
architecture, embedded systems, high-performance computing)
Ben Zhao, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, Associate Professor (computer/
overlay/mobile networking, large-scale distributed systems, operating systems, network 
simulation and modeling)
Heather Zheng, Ph.D., University of Maryland, College Park, Associate Professor (wireless/
mobile/ad hoc networking, cognitive radio and dynamic spectrum networks, multimedia 
communications, security, game theory, algorithms, network simulation and modeling)
The Computer Engineering major’s objec-
tive is to educate broadly based engineers 
with an understanding of digital electronics, 
computer architecture, system software 
and integrated circuit design. These topics 
bridge traditional electrical engineering and 
computer science curricula. The Computer 
Engineering degree program is conducted 
jointly with faculty from the Department of 
Computer Science and the Department 
of Electrical and Computer Engineering. 
Computer engineers emerging from this 
program will be able to design and build 
integrated digital hardware and software 
systems in a wide range of applications 
areas. Computer engineers will seldom 
work alone and thus teamwork and project 
management skills are also emphasized. 
The undergraduate major in Computer 
Engineering prepares students for a wide 
range of positions in business, government 
and private industrial research, develop-
ment and manufacturing organizations.
Under the direction of the Associate 
Dean for Undergraduate Studies, academic 
advising services are jointly provided by 
advisors in the College of Engineering, as 
well as advisors in the department. Faculty 
advisors are also available to help with 
academic program planning. Students who 
hope to change to this major should consult 
the department advisor.
The Computer Engineering program is 
accredited by the Engineering Accreditation 
Commission of ABET, http://www.abet.org.
Mission Statement
To prepare our students to reach their full 
potential in computer engineering research 
and industrial practice through a curricu-
lum emphasizing the mathematical tools, 
scientific basics, fundamental knowledge, 
engineering principles, and practical experi-
ence in the field.
Educational Objectives
The Computer Engineering Program seeks 
to produce graduates who:
1) Make positive contributions to society by 
applying their broad knowledge of com-
puter engineering theories, techniques, 
and tools.
2) Create processes and products, involv-
ing both hardware and software compo-
nents, that solve societal and organiza-
tional problems effectively, reliably, and 
economically.
3) Are committed to the advancement of 
science, technical innovation, lifelong 
learning, professionalism, and mentoring 
of future generations of engineers.
4) Understand the ethical, social, business, 
technical, and human contexts of the 
world in which their engineering contribu-
tions will be utilized.
Program Outcomes
Upon completion of this program, students 
will have:
1) Acquired strong basic knowledge and 
skills in those fundamental areas of 
mathematics, science, and engineering 
necessary to facilitate specialized profes-
sional training at an advanced level. De-
veloped a recognition of the need for and 
the ability to engage in lifelong learning.
2) Experienced in-depth training in state-
of-the-art specialty areas in computer 
engineering.  
3) Benefited from hands-on, practical labo-
ratory experiences where appropriate 
throughout the program.  The laboratory 
experiences will be closely integrated 
with coursework and will make use of up-
to-date instrumentation and computing 
facilities.  Students will have completed 
both hardware-oriented and software-
oriented assignments. 
4) Experienced design-oriented challenges 
that exercise and integrate skills and 
knowledge acquired during their course 
of study.  These challenges may include 
design of components or subsystems 
with performance specifications.  Gradu-
ates should be able to demonstrate 
an ability to design and test a system, 
analyze experimental results, and draw 
logical conclusions from them.
5) Learned to function well in multidisci-
plinary teams and collaborative envi-
ronments.  To this end, students must 
develop communication skills, both 
written and oral, through teamwork and 
classroom participation. Teamwork and 
individual originality will be evidenced 
through written reports, webpage prepa-
ration, and public presentations.
6) Completed a well-rounded and balanced 
education through required studies in se-
lected areas of fine arts, humanities, and 
social sciences.  This outcome provides 
for the ability to understand the impact 
of engineering solutions in a global and 
societal context.  A required course in 
engineering ethics will have prepared 
----------------Page (26) Break----------------
26 • COMPUTER SCIENCE
students for making professional con-
tributions while maintaining institutional 
and individual integrity. 
Undergraduate Program
Bachelor of Science—Computer 
Engineering
A minimum of 189 units is required for 
graduation. A complete list of requirements 
for the major can be found on page 48.
Schedules should be planned to meet both 
General Education and major require-
ments.
The curriculum contains a core required 
of all computer engineers, a choice of 
at least 40 units of senior year elective 
courses including completion of two out of 
ten elective sequences and a senior year 
capstone design project.
Because the Computer Engineering 
degree program is conducted jointly by the 
Department of Computer Science and the 
Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, several of the upper-division 
courses have equivalent versions offered 
by ECE or CMPSC. These courses are 
considered interchangeable, but only one 
such course of a given equivalent ECE/
CMPSC pair may be taken for credit.
Courses required for the major, whether 
inside or outside of the Departments of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering or 
Computer Science, must be taken for let-
ter grades. They cannot be taken for the 
passed/not passed grading option.
The upper-division requirements consist of 
a set of required courses and a minimum of 
40 units (10 classes) of additional depart-
mental elective courses comprised of at 
least two sequences chosen from a set of 
eight specialty sequences. Each sequence 
must consist of two or more courses taken 
from the same course/sequence group. 
The department electives must also include 
a capstone design project (CMPSC 189A-
B/ECE 189A-B). Upper-division courses re-
quired for the major are: Computer Science 
130A, 170; ECE 152A,154, 156A; either 
ECE 139 or PSTAT 120A; Engineering 101.
The required departmental electives are 
taken primarily in the senior year; they per-
mit students to develop depth in specialty 
areas of their choice. A student’s elective 
course program and senior project must be 
approved by a departmental faculty advi-
sor. A variety of elective programs will be 
considered acceptable. Sample programs 
include those with emphasis in: computer-
aided design (CAD); computer systems 
design; computer networks; distributed sys-
tems; programming languages; real-time 
computing and control; multimedia; and 
very large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuit 
design.
The defined sequences from which 
upper-division departmental electives may 
be chosen are:
• Computer Systems Design: ECE/CMPSC 
153A, ECE 153B
• Computer Networks: ECE 155A/CMPSC 
176A, ECE 155B/CMPSC 176B
• Distributed Systems: ECE 151/CMPSC 
171 and one or both of the Computer 
Networks courses
• Programming Languages: CMPSC 160, 
162
• Real-Time Computing & Control: ECE 
147A-B, 157
• Multimedia: ECE 178, ECE/CMPSC 
181B, ECE 160/CMPSC 182
• VLSI: ECE 124A, 124D
• Signal Processing: ECE 130A-B
Satisfactory Progress and  
Prerequisites
A majority of Computer Science and Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering courses 
have prerequisites which must be com-
pleted successfully. Successful completion 
of prerequisite classes requires a grade of 
C or better in Mathematics 3A-B-C and a 
grade of C- or better in ECE classes. Stu-
dents will not be permitted to take any ECE 
or CMPSC course if they received a grade 
of F in one or more of its prerequisites. 
Students who fail to maintain a grade-point 
average of at least 2.0 in the major may 
be denied the privilege of continuing in the 
major.
Computer  
Engineering 
Courses
See listings for Computer Science courses 
starting on page 28 and Electrical and 
Computer Engineering starting on page 33.
Computer 
Science
Department of Computer Science, Harold Frank Hall, Room 2104; 
Telephone (805) 893-4321 Web site: www.cs.ucsb.edu
Chair:  Ambuj Singh Vice Chair: Elizabeth Belding
Faculty
Divyakant Agrawal, Ph.D., State University of New York at Stony Brook, Professor 
(distributed systems and databases)
Kevin Almeroth, Ph.D., Georgia Institute of Technology, Professor (computer networks 
and protocols, large-scale multimedia systems, performance evaluation and 
distributed systems)
Elizabeth Belding, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara, Professor (mobile 
wireless networking, network performance evaluation, advanced service support, 
solutions for developing and under-developed regions)
Tevfik Bultan, Ph.D., University of Maryland, College Park, Professor (web software 
and services, dependability, concurrency, automated verification, static analysis, 
software engineering)
Peter R. Cappello, Ph.D., Princeton University, Professor (JAVA/ internet-based 
parallel computing, multiprocessor scheduling, market-based resource allocation, self-
directed learning)
Phillip Conrad, Ph.D., University of Delaware, Lecturer LSOE (computer        
science education, web technologies, computer networks and communication, 
transport protocols, multimedia computing)*1
Ömer Egecioglu, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego, Professor (bijective 
and enumerative combinatorics, parallel algorithms, approximation algorithms, 
combinatorial algorithms)
Amr El Abbadi, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor (Information and data management; 
distributed systems, cloud computing)
Frederic Gibou, Ph.D., University of California, Los Angeles, Professor 
(High resolution multiscale simulation, scientific computing, tools and software for 
computational science and engineering, engineering applications)*2
John R. Gilbert, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor (combinatorial scientific computing, 
high-performance graph algorithms, tools and software for computational science and 
engineering, numerical linear algebra)
Teofilo Gonzalez, Ph.D., University of 
Minnesota, Professor (approximation algorithms; parallel computing multicasting; 
scheduling theory; placement and routing; computational geometry; analysis of 
algorithms)
----------------Page (27) Break----------------
COMPUTER SCIENCE • 27
Ben Hardekopf, Ph.D., University of Texas at Austin, Assistant Professor (programming 
languages: design, analysis and implementation) 
Tobias Höllerer, Ph.D., Columbia University, Professor (human computer 
interaction; augmented reality; virtual reality; visualization; computer graphics; 3D displays 
and interaction; wearable and ubiquitous computing)
Chandra Krintz, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego, Professor 
(programming language implementations, dynamic and adaptive program analysis 
and optimization, mobile and distributed programming systems, cloud computing 
platforms (AppScale))
Christopher Kruegel, Ph.D., Vienna University of Technology, Associate Professor 
(computer security, program analysis, operating systems, network security, malicious 
code analysis and detection)
Huijia Lin, PhD, Cornell University, Assistant Professor (cryptography, theory of computing, 
security)
Linda R. Petzold, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Professor (modeling, 
simulation and analysis of multiscale systems in systems biology and engineering)*2
Tim Sherwood, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego, Professor 
(computer architecture, secure processors, embedded systems, program analysis and 
characterization)
Ambuj Singh, Ph.D., University of Texas at Austin, Professor (network science, 
cheminformatics & bioinformatics, graph querying and mining, databases)*3
Jianwen Su, Ph.D., University of Southern California, Professor (database systems, Web 
services, workflow management and BPM)
Subhash Suri, Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University, Professor (algorithms, networked 
sensing, data streams, computational geometry, game theory)
Stefano M. Tessaro, PhD, ETH Zurich, Assistant Professor (cryptography, computer 
security, complexity theory, information theory)
Matthew Turk, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (computer vision, 
human computer interaction, perceptual computing, artificial intelligence)
Wim van Dam, Ph.D., University of Oxford and University of Amsterdam, Associate 
Professor (quantum computation, quantum algorithms, quantum communication, quantum 
information theory)*5
Giovanni Vigna, Ph.D., Politecnico di Milano, Professor (computer and network security, 
intrusion detection, vulnerability, analysis and security testing, web security, malware 
detection)
Yuan-Fang Wang, Ph.D., University of Texas at Austin, Professor (computer vision, 
computer graphics, artificial intelligence)
Richard Wolski, Ph.D., University of California, Davis/Livermore, Professor 
(cloud computing, high-performance distributed computing, computational grids, 
and computational economies for resource 
allocation and scheduling)
Xifeng Yan, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Associate Professor 
(data mining, data management, machine learning, bioinformatics, information networks)
Tao Yang, Ph.D., Rutgers University, Professor (parallel and distributed systems, 
Internet search, and high performance computing)
Ben Zhao, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, Associate Professor (online social 
networks, data-intensive computing, cloud computing, dynamic spectrum networks, 
anonymity and privacy, distributed systems)
Heather Zheng, Ph.D., University of Maryland, College Park, Associate Professor 
(wireless/mobile/ad hoc networking, cognitive radio and dynamic spectrum networks, 
multimedia communications, security, game theory, algorithms, network simulation and 
modeling)
Emeriti Faculty
Oscar H. Ibarra, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, Professor (design and 
analysis of algorithms, theory of computation, computational complexity, parallel computing)
Richard A. Kemmerer, Ph.D., University of California, Los Angeles, Professor 
(specification and verification of systems, computer system security and reliability, 
programming and specification language design, software engineering) 
Alan G. Konheim, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor Emeritus (computer 
communications, computer systems, modeling and analysis, cryptography) 
Marvin Marcus, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, Professor Emeritus 
(linear and multilinear algebra, scientific computation, numerical algorithms)
Terence R. Smith, Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University, Professor Emeritus (spatial 
databases, techniques in artificial machine intelligence)*4
*1 Joint appointment with College of Creative Studies*2 Joint appointment with Mechanical Engineering
*3 Joint appointment with Biomolecular Science & Engineering*4 Joint appointment with Geography
*5 Joint appointment with Physics*6 Joint appointment with Electrical & Computer Engineering
Affiliated Faculty
B.S. Manjunath, Ph.D., (Electrical and Computer Engineering)
P. Michael Melliar-Smith, Ph.D. (Electrical and Computer Engineering)
Kenneth Rose, Ph.D. (Electrical and Computer Engineering)
Martin Raubal, Ph.D. (Geography) 
Many of the greatest challenges facing 
our world today are increasingly reliant 
on computing for their solutions — from 
conquering disease to eliminating hunger, 
from improving education to protecting the 
climate and environment.  Information is 
key to all of these efforts, and computer 
scientists make it possible to visualize, se-
cure, explore, transmit, and transform this 
information in ways never before thought 
possible.  Solving problems through com-
putation means teamwork, collaboration, 
and gaining the interdisciplinary skills that 
modern careers demand.  Our goal with 
the Computer Science curriculum at UCSB 
is to impart to students the knowledge and 
experience required for them to participate 
in this exciting and high-impact discipline.
Mission Statement
The Computer Science Department seeks 
to prepare undergraduate and graduate 
students for productive careers in industry, 
academia, and government, by providing 
an outstanding environment for teaching 
and research in the core and emerging 
areas of the discipline.  The department 
places high priority on establishing and 
maintaining innovative research programs 
that enhance educational opportunity.
The Department of Computer Science 
offers programs leading to the degrees of 
Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science in 
computer science, and the M.S. and Ph.D. 
in computer science. The B.A. is a College 
of Letters and Science major; the B.S. is 
a College of Engineering major. The B.S. 
degree program in computer science is 
accredited by the Computing Accreditation 
Commission of ABET, http://www.abet.org.
One of the most important aspects of the 
Computer Science program at UCSB is 
the wealth of “hands-on” opportunities for 
students. UCSB has excellent computer 
facilities. Campus Instructional Computing 
makes accounts available to all students. 
Computer Science majors and premajors 
use the workstations in the Computer 
Science Instructional Lab and Engineer-
ing Computing Infrastructure computing 
facilities. Students doing special projects 
can gain remote access to machines at the 
NSF Supercomputing Centers.
Additional computing facilities are avail-
able for graduate students in the Gradu-
ate Student Laboratory. Students working 
with faculty have access to the specialized 
research facilities within the Department of 
Computer Science.
The undergraduate major in computer 
science has a dual purpose: to prepare stu-
dents for advanced studies and research 
and to provide training for a variety of 
careers in business, industry, and govern-
ment.
Under the direction of the Associate Dean 
for Undergraduate Studies, academic 
advising services are jointly provided by 
advisors in the College of Engineering, 
as well as advisors in the department. A 
faculty advisor is also available to help with 
academic program planning.
Program Goals for Undergraduate 
Programs
The goal of the computer science under-
graduate program is to prepare future 
generations of computer professionals for 
long-term careers in research, technical 
development, and applications.  Gradu-
ates of the B.S. and B.A. programs that 
----------------Page (28) Break----------------
28 • COMPUTER SCIENCE
wish to seek immediate employment are 
prepared for a wide range of computer 
science positions in industry and govern-
ment. Outstanding graduates interested in 
highly technical careers, research, and/or 
academia, might consider furthering their 
education in graduate school.
The primary computer science depart-
mental emphasis is on problem solving 
using computer program design, analysis 
and implementation, with both a theoretical 
foundation and a practical component.
Program Outcomes for 
Undergraduate Programs
The program enables students to achieve, 
by the time of graduation: 
1.  An ability to apply knowledge of com-
puting and mathematics appropriate to 
computer science.
2.  An ability to analyze a problem, and 
identify and define the computing 
requirements appropriate to its solution.
3.  An ability to design, implement, and 
evaluate a computer-based system, 
process, component, or program to 
meet desired needs.
4.  An ability to function effectively on 
teams to accomplish a common goal.
5.  An understanding of professional, ethi-
cal, and social responsibilities.
6.  An ability to communicate effectively.
7.  An ability to analyze the impact of com-
puting on individuals, organizations, 
and society, including ethical, legal, 
security, and global policy issue.
8.  Recognition of the need for and an abil-
ity to engage in continuing professional 
development.
9.  An ability to use current techniques, 
skills, and tools necessary for comput-
ing practice.
10. An ability to apply mathematical 
foundations, algorithmic principles, 
and computer science theory in the 
modeling and design of computer-
based systems in a way that demon-
strates comprehension of the trade-offs 
involved in design choices.
11. An ability to apply design and develop-
ment principles in the construction of 
software systems of varying complexity.
Admission to the Major
Students interested in computer science 
who apply to UCSB should declare 
the computer science major when they 
apply.  UCSB students in majors other 
than computer science major can petition 
to the Department of Computer Science 
for consideration for admission via 
change-of-major once they complete the 
minimum requirements (specified on the 
departmental web pages) for doing so. 
Computer Science majors have priority 
when registering for all Computer Science 
courses.
Students admitted to the computer sci-
ence major are responsible for satisfying 
major requirements in effect when they 
declare their major. Upper and lower divi-
sion courses required for the major that 
are offered by the Department of Computer 
Science or any other department must be 
taken for letter grades
Undergraduate Program
Bachelor of Science— 
Computer Science
A minimum of 184 units is required for 
graduation. A complete list of requirements 
for the major can be found on page 50. 
Schedules should be planned to meet both 
General Education and major require-
ments. 
Students with no previous program-
ming background should take CMPSC 8  
before taking CMPSC 16. CMPSC 8  is not 
included in the list of preparation for the 
major courses but may be counted as a 
free elective.
Students applying for major status in the 
BS program who have completed more 
than 105 units will not be considered for a 
change of major/change of college.
   Students may petition to enter the Com-
puter Science major when the following 
requirements are met:
1.  A cumulative grade point average of at 
least 3.0;
2.  Satisfactory completion of Computer 
Science 16 and 24 with a cumulative 
GPA of 3.2 or higher; First takes only
3.  Satisfactory completion of Math 3A, 3B, 
4A, 4B and Computer Science 40 with 
a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or higher; First 
takes only
The selection process is highly competi-
tive and these milestones are minimum 
requirements for consideration, achieving 
them does not guarantee admission to the 
Computer Science major.  Any petitions 
denied will be automatically considered a 
second time in the next quarter.  Petitions 
denied a second time will not be reconsid-
ered.
More information can be found at http://
cs.ucsb.edu/undergraduate/admissions/.
Bachelor of Science—Computer 
Engineering
This major is offered jointly by the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing. For information about this major, see 
page 25.  
Computer 
Science Courses
LOWER DIVISION
1. Seminar on the Field of Computer Science(1) FRANKLIN
Overviews the potential of, and opportunities available from, the field of computer science. Topics 
include an overview of how computers work and the interesting ways in which computers can be applied 
to solve important and high-impact technological, social, and cutting-edge research problems.
8. Introduction to Computer Science
(4) CONRAD, FRANKLIN     Not open for credit to students who have com-
pleted Computer Science 16 or Engineering 3.Legal repeat for CMPSC 5AA-ZZ.
Introduction to computer program development for students with little to no programming experi-
ence. Basic programming concepts, variables and expressions, data and control structures, algorithms, 
debugging, program design, and documentation.
11AA-ZZ. Programming Language Laboratory(1) FRANKLIN
Different sections may be repeated. Sections not always offered. 
Recommended preparation: knowledge of at least one programming language. 
A self-paced course to allow a student who already possesses a working knowledge of at least 
one programming language an opportunity to learn other languages of interest. 
16. Problem Solving with Computers I
(4) CONRAD, KRINTZPrerequisite: Math 3A with a C or better (may be
taken concurrently) CS 8 with a C or better, Engi-neering 3, AP CS, or a intro to programming course.
       Legal repeat of CMPSC 10.   Fundamental building blocks for solving 
problems using computers. Topics include basic computer organization and programming constructs: 
memory CPU, binary arithmetic, variables, expres-sions, statements, conditionals, iteration, functions, 
parameters, recursion, primitive and composite data types, and basic operating system and debugging 
tool.
24. Problem Solving with Computers II
(4) FRANKLIN, COSTANZOPrerequisite: Computer Science 16 with a grade of C 
or better; and Math 3B (may be taken concurrently).    Not open for credit to students who have com-
pleted Computer Science 20.Intermediate building blocks for solving problems 
using computers. Topics include data structures, object-oriented design and development, algorithms 
for manipulating these data structures and their runtime analyses. Data structures introduced include 
stacks, queues, lists, trees, and sets.
32. Object Oriented Design and Implementation
(4) HOLLERERPrerequisite: Computer Science 24 with a grade of 
C or better.     Computer Science 32 is a legal repeat for    
Computer Science 60.     Advanced topics in object-oriented comput-
ing. Topics include encapsulation, data hiding, inheritance, polymorphism, compilation, linking and 
loading, memory management, and debugging; recent advances in design and development tools, 
practices, libraries, and operating system support.
40. Foundations of Computer Science(5) VAN DAM, SU
Prerequisites: Computer Science 16 with a grade of C or better; and Mathematics 4A with a grade of C 
or better.  Introduction to the theoretical underpinnings 
of computer science. Topics include propositional predicate logic, set theory, functions and relations, 
counting, mathematical induction and recursion (generating functions).
----------------Page (29) Break----------------
COMPUTER SCIENCE • 29
48. Computer Science Project
(4) CAPPELLOPrerequisite: Computer Science 32 with a grade of 
C or better.     Team-based project development. Topics include 
software engineering and professional development practices, interface design, advanced library support; 
techniques for team-oriented design and develop-ment, testing and test-driven development, and 
software reliability and robustness. Students present and demonstrate their final projects.
56. Advanced Applications Programming
(4) CONRADPrerequisite: Computer Science 24 and 32 with a 
grade of C or better.Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Computer Science 20Advanced application programming using a 
highlevel, virtual-machine-based language. Topics include generic programming, exception handling, 
programming language implementation; automatic memory management, and application development, 
management, and maintenance tools; event handling, concurrency and threading, and advanced 
library use.
64. Computer Organization and Logic Design
(4) ZHENG, FRANKLINPrerequisite: Computer Science 16 with a grade of 
C or better; and Mathematics 3C or 4A with a grade of C or better..
     Not open for credit to students who have com-pleted ECE 15 or ECE 15B or Computer Science 30.
     Course counts as a legal repeat of CMPSC 30.     Assembly language programming and advanced 
computer organization; Digital logic design topics including gates, combinational circuits, flip-flops, and 
the design and analysis of sequential circuits.
95AA-ZZ. Undergraduate Seminar in Computer Science  
(1-4) STAFFPrerequisites: Open to pre-computer science and 
pre-computer engineering majors only; consent of instructor.
Seminars on introductory topics in computer science. These seminars provide an overview of 
the history, technology, applications, and impact in various areas of computer science, including: A. 
Foundations, B. Software Systems, C. Programming languages and software engineering, D. Information 
management, E. Architecture, F. Networking, G. Security, H. Scientific computing, I. Intelligent and 
interactive systems, J. History, N. General. 
99. Independent Studies in Computer Science 
(1-4) STAFFMust have a minimum 3.0 grade point average. 
May be repeated. Students are limited to 5 units per quarter and 30 units total in all 99/198/199 courses 
combined.Independent studies in computer science for 
advanced students.
UPPER DIVISION
111. Introduction to Computational Science(4) PETZOLD
Prerequisite: Mathematics 5A or 4B with a grade of C or better; Mathematics 5B or 6A with a grade of 
C or better; Computer Science 24 with a grade of C or better.
Not open for credit to students who have completed Computer Science 110A.
Introduction to computational science, emphasizing basic numerical algorithms and the 
informed use of mathematical software. Matrix computation, systems of linear and nonlinear 
equations, interpolation and zero finding, differential equations, numerical integration. Students learn and 
use the Matlab language.
130A. Data Structures and Algorithms I(4) GONZALEZ
Prerequisites: Computer Science 40 with a grade of C or better; Computer Science 32 with a grade of C 
or better; Computer Science 48 with a grade of C or better (can be taken concurrently); PSTAT 120A 
or ECE 139; open to computer science, computer 
engineering, and electrical engineering majors only. The study of data structures and their applications. 
Correctness proofs and techniques for the design of correct programs. Internal and external searching. 
Hashing and height balanced trees. Analysis of sorting algorithms. Memory management. Graph 
traversal techniques and their applications.
130B. Data Structures and Algorithms II(4) GONZALEZ, SURI
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130A.Design and analysis of computer algorithms. 
Correctness proofs and solution of recurrence relations. Design techniques; divide and conquer, 
greedy strategies, dynamic programming, branch and bound, backtracking, and local search. 
Applications of techniques to problems from several disciplines. NP - completeness. 
138. Automata and Formal Languages(4) EGECIOGLU
Prerequisite: Computer Science 40 with a grade of C or better; open to computer science and computer 
engineering majors only.Formal languages; finite automata and regular 
expressions; properties of regular languages; pushdown automata and context-free grammars; 
properties of context-free languages; introduction to computability and unsolvability. Introduction to Turing 
machines and computational complexity. 
140. Parallel Scientific Computing(4) GILBERT
Prerequisite: Mathematics 4B or 5A with a grade of C or better; Mathematics 6A or 5B with a grade of C 
or better; Computer Science 130A.Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Computer Science 110B.Fundamentals of high performance computing 
and parallel algorithm design for numerical computation. Topics include parallel architecture 
and clusters, parallel programming with message-passing libraries and threads, program parallelization 
methodologies, parallel performance evaluation and optimization, parallel numerical algorithms and 
applications with different performance trade-offs.
153A. Hardware/Software Interface(4) KRINTZ, BREWER
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing in computer science, computer engineering, or electrical 
engineering.Same course as ECE 153A.
Issues in interfacing computing systems and software to practical I/O interfaces. Rapid response, 
real-time events and management of tasks, threads, and scheduling required for efficient design of 
embedded software and systems is discussed. Techniques for highly constrained systems. 
154. Computer Architecture(4) SHERWOOD, CHONG
Prerequisite: Computer Science 32 and Computer Science 64. 
Not open for credit to students who have received credit for ECE 154, ECE 154A, or ECE 
154B. Introduction to the architecture of computer 
systems. Topics include: central processing units, memory systems, channels and controllers, 
peripheral devices, interrupt systems, software versus hardware trade-offs.
160. Translation of Programming Languages(4) SHERWOOD
Prerequisite: Computer Science 64 or Electrical Engineering 154 or Electrical Engineering 154A; 
Computer Science 130A; and Computer Science 138; open to computer science and computer 
engineering majors only.Study of the structure of compilers. Topics 
include: lexical analysis; syntax analysis including LL and LR parsers; type checking; run-time 
environments; intermediate code generation; and compiler-construction tools.
162. Programming Languages(4) HARDEKOPF, KRINTZ
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130A and Computer Science 138; open to computer science and 
computer engineering majors only.Concepts of programming languages: scopes, 
parameter passing, storage management; control flow, exception handling; encapsulation 
and modularization mechanism; reusability through genericity and inheritance; type systems; 
programming paradigms (imperative, object-oriented, functional, and others). Emerging 
programming languages and their development infrastructures.
165A. Artificial Intelligence(4) TURK
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130AIntroduction to the field of artificial intelligence, 
which seeks to understand and build intelligent computational systems. Topics include intelligent 
agents, problem solving and heuristic search, knowledge representation and reasoning, 
uncertainty, probabilistic reasoning, and applications of AI.
165B. Machine Learning(4) SINGH
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130A.Covers the most important techniques of machine 
learning (ML) and includes discussions of: well-posed learning problems; artificial neural networks; 
concept learning and general to specific ordering; decision tree learning; genetic algorithms; Bayesian 
learning; analytical learning; and others.
170. Operating Systems(4) KRUEGEL, ZHAO
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130A; and, Computer Science 154 or ECE 154 (may be taken 
concurrently); open to computer science, computer engineering or electrical engineering majors only.
Basic concepts of operating systems. The notion of a process; interprocess communication and 
synchronization; input-output, file systems, memory management. 
171. Distributed Systems(4) EL ABBADI
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130A. Not open for credit to students who have 
completed ECE 151.Distributed systems architecture, distributed 
programming, network of computers, message passing, remote procedure calls, group 
communication, naming and membership problems, asynchrony, logical time, consistency, fault-
tolerance, and recovery.
174A. Fundamentals of Database Systems(4) SU
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130ARecommended Preparation: Students are 
strongly encouraged to complete Computer Science 56 prior to enrolling in Computer Science 174A
Database system architectures, relational data model, relational algebra, relational calculus, SQL, 
QBE, query processing, integrity constraints (key constraints, referential integrity), database design, 
ER and object-oriented data model, functional dependencies, lossless join and dependency 
preserving decompositions, Boyce-Codd and Third Normal Forms.
176A. Introduction to Computer Communication Networks
(4) ALMEROTH, BELDINGPrerequisite: CMPSC 32 with a grade of C or better; 
PSTAT 120A or ECE 139; open to computer science, electrical engineering, and computer engineering 
majors only. Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Computer Science 176 or ECE 155 or ECE 155A.
Recommended preparation: PSTAT 120B.Basic concepts in networking, the OSI model, 
error detection codes, flow control, routing, medium access control, and high-speed networks.
176B. Network Computing(4) ZHAO, VIGNA
Prerequisite: Computer Science 176A. Not open for credit to students who have 
completed ECE 155B or 194W.Focus on networking and web technologies 
----------------Page (30) Break----------------
30 • ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING
used in the Internet. The class covers socket programming and web-based techniques that are 
used to build distributed applications.
176C. Advanced Topics in Internet Computing(4) BELDING, ZHENG
Prerequisite: Computer Science 176B.General overview of wireless and mobile 
networking, multimedia, security multicast, quality of service, IPv6, and web caching. During the second 
half of the course, one or more of the above topics are studied in greater detail.
177. Computer Security(4) KEMMERER
Prerequisite: Computer Science 170 (may be taken concurrently).
Introduction to the basics of computer security and privacy. Analysis of technical difficulties of 
producing secure computer information systems that provide guaranteed controlled sharing. Examination 
and critique of current systems, methods, certification.
178. Introduction to Cryptography  (4) EGECIOGLU
Prerequisites: Computer Science 24 and Computer Science 40 with a grade of C or better; and 
PSTAT 120A or 121A or ECE 139 or permission of instructor.
An introduction to the basic concepts and techniques of cryptography and cryptanalysis. Topics 
include: The Shannon Theory, classical systems, the Enigma machine, the data encryption standard, 
public key systems, digital signatures, file security.  
180. Computer Graphics(4) WANG
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130A or consent of instructor.
Overview of OpenGL graphics standard, OpenGL state machine, other 3D graphics libraries, 3D 
graphics pipeline, 3D transformations and clipping, color model, shading model, shadow algorithms, 
texturing, curves and curved surfaces, graphics hardware, interaction devices and techniques.
181B. Introduction to Computer Vision(4) WANG, TURK
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing.Same course as ECE 181B.
Overview of computer vision problems and techniques for analyzing the content images 
and video. Topics include image formation, edge detection, image segmentation, pattern recognition, 
texture analysis, optical flow, stereo vision, shape representation and recovery techniques, issues in 
object recognition, and case studies of practical vision systems.
185. Human-Computer Interaction(4) HOLLERER
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing in computer science, computer engineering, or electrical 
engineering majors. Recommended preparation: Students are 
strongly encouraged to complete Computer Science 56 prior to enrolling in Computer Science 185. 
Proficiency in the Java/C++ programming language, some experience with user interface programming.
The study of human-computer interaction enables system architects to design useful, efficient, 
and enjoyable computer interfaces. This course teaches the theory, design guidelines, programming 
practices, and evaluation procedures behind effective human interaction with computers.
189A. Senior Computer Systems Project(4) BULTAN
Prerequisite: Senior standing in computer engineering, computer science, or electrical 
engineering; consent of instructor.Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Computer Science 172 or ECE 189A.Student groups design a significant computer-
based project. Multiple groups may cooperate toward one large project. Each group works 
independently; interaction among groups is via interface specifications and informal meetings. 
Project for follow-up course may be different. 
189B. Senior Computer Systems Project(4) BULTAN
Prerequisite: CMPSC 189A; Senior standing in computer engineering, computer science, or 
electrical engineering; consent of instructor.Not open for credit to students who have 
completed ECE 189A or ECE 189B.Student groups design a significant computer-
based project. Multiple groups may cooperate toward one large project. Each group works 
independently; interaction among groups is via interface specifications and informal meetings. 
Project for course may be different from that in first course. 
190AA-ZZ. Special Topics in Computer Science
(4) STAFFPrerequisite: consent of instructor. 
May be repeated with consent of the department chair.
Courses provide for the study of topics of current interest in computer science: A. Foundations; B. 
Software Systems; C. Programming languages and software engineering; D. Information management; 
E. Architecture; F. Networking; G. Security; H. Scientific computing; I. Intelligent and interactive 
systems; N. General
192. Projects in Computer Science(1-5) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Students must have a minimum 3.0 GPA. 
May be repeated to a maximum of 8 units with consent of the department chair but only 4 units may 
be applied to the major.Projects in computer science for advanced 
undergraduate students.
193. Internship in Industry(1-4) STAFF
Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department chair.
Not more than 4 units per quarter; may not be used as a field elective and may not be applied to 
science electives. May be repeated with faculty/chair approval to a maximum of 4 units.
Special projects for selected students. Offered in conjunction with selected industrial and research 
firms under direct faculty supervision. Prior departmental approval required. Written proposal 
and final report required.
196. Undergraduate Research(2-4) STAFF
Prerequisite: Students must: (1) have attained upper-division standing (2) have a minimum3.0 
grade-point average for preceding three quarters, (3) have consent of instructor.
May be repeated for up to 12 units. No more than 4 units may be applied to departmental electives.
Research opportunities for undergraduate students. Students will be expected to give regular 
oral presentations, actively participate in a weekly seminar, and prepare at least one written report on 
their research.
199. Independent Studies in Computer Science
(1-4) STAFFPrerequisites: upper-division standing; must have 
completed at least two upper-division courses in computer science. 
Must have a minimum 3.0 grade-point average for the preceding three quarters. May be repeated 
with consent of chair. Students are limited to 5 units per quarter and 30 units total in all 198/199 courses 
combined. May not be used for credit towards the major.
Independent study in computer science for advanced students.
GRADUATE COURSES
Graduate courses for this major can be found in the UCSB General Catalog.
Electrical & 
Computer 
Engineering
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Building 380, Room 101;  
Telephone (805) 893-2269 or (805) 893-3821 Web site: www.ece.ucsb.edu 
Chair: Joao Hespanha Vice Chair: B.S. Manjunath  
Faculty
Rod C. Alferness, Ph.D., University of Michigan, Professor and Dean (integrated 
optoelectronics, optical switching technology and switched optical networks) 
Kaustav Banerjee, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (high performance VLSI and mixed 
signal system-on-chip designs and their design automation methods; single electron 
transistors; 3D and optoelectronic integration)
Daniel J. Blumenthal, Ph.D., University of Colorado at Boulder, Professor (fiber-optic 
networks, wavelength and subcarrier division multiplexing, photonic packet switching, signal 
processing in semiconductor optical devices, wavelength conversion, microwave photonics) 
John E. Bowers, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor (high-speed photonic and electronic 
devices and integrated circuits, fiber optic communication, semiconductors, laser 
physics and mode-locking phenomena, compound semiconductor materials and 
processing)
ECE department Chair Joao Hespanha delivers Starbucks during finals week to hardworking 
students outside the new wing of the campus library during a #coffeemecoe event.
----------------Page (31) Break----------------
ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING • 31
Forrest D. Brewer, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Professor (VLSI 
and computer system design automation, theory of design and design representations, 
symbolic techniques in high level synthesis)
James Buckwalter, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Professor (RF and mixed-
signal CMOS integrated circuits, high-speed communications systems)
Alberto Giovanni G. Busetto, Ph.D., ETH Zurich, Switzerland, Assistant Professor 
(machine learning, adaptive systems, experimental design, systems biology)
Katie A. Byl, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Associate Professor (robotics, 
autonomous systems, dynamics, control, manipulation, locomotion, machine learning)
Shivkumar Chandrasekaran, Ph.D., Yale University, Professor (numerical 
analysis, numerical linear algebra, scientific computation)
Kwang-Ting (Tim) Cheng, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (design automation, VLSI 
testing, design synthesis, design verification, algorithms)
Larry A. Coldren, Ph.D., Stanford University, Kavli Professor in Optoelectronics and 
Sensors, Director of Optoelectronics Technology Center (semiconductor integrated 
optoelectronics, vertical-cavity lasers, widely-tunable lasers, optical fiber communication, 
growth and planar processing techniques) *1
Nadir Dagli, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (design, fabrication, 
and modeling of photonic integrated circuits, ultrafast electrooptic modulators, solid state 
microwave and millimeter wave devices; experimental study of ballistic transport in 
quantum confined structures)
Steven P. DenBaars, Ph.D., University of Southern California, Professor (metalorganic 
vapor phase epitaxy, optoelectronic materials, compound semiconductors, indium phosphide 
and gallium nitride, photonic devices) *1
Jerry Gibson, Ph.D., Southern Methodist University, Professor (digital signal 
processing, data, speech, image and video compression, and communications via multi-
use networks, data embedding, adaptive filtering)
Joao Hespanha, Ph.D., Yale University, Professor (hybrid and switched systems, 
supervisory control, control of computer networks, probabilistic games, the use of 
vision in feedback control)
Jonathan Klamkin, Ph.D., UC Santa Barbara, Associate Professor
Hua Lee, Ph.D., UC Santa Barbara, Professor (image system optimization, high-performance 
image formation algorithms, synthetic-aperture radar and sonar systems, acoustic 
microscopy, microwave nondestructive evaluation, dynamic vision systems)
Michael Liebling, Ph.D., École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Associate Professor 
(image processing, optical microscopy, In Vivo biological imaging) 
Upamanyu Madhow, Ph.D., University of Illinois, Professor (spread-spectrum and 
multiple-access communications, space-time 
coding, and internet protocols)
B.S. Manjunath, Ph.D., University of Southern California, Professor (image 
processing, computer vision, pattern recognition, neural networks, learning 
algorithms, content based search in multimedia databases)
Jason R. Marden, Ph.D., UC Los Angeles Assistant Professor
Malgorzata Marek-Sadowska, Ph.D., Technical University of Warsaw, Poland, 
Professor (design automation, computer-aided design, integrated circuit layout, logic 
synthesis)
Umesh Mishra, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor (high-speed transistors, 
semiconductor device physics, quantum electronics, wide band gap materials and 
devices, design and fabrication of millimeter-wave devices, in situ processing and 
integration techniques)
Yasamin Mostofi, Ph.D., Stanford University, Associate Professor (mobile sensor networks, 
wireless systems, networked control systems)
Behrooz Parhami, Ph.D., UC Los Angeles, Professor (parallel architectures and 
algorithms, computer arithmetic, computer design, dependable and fault-tolerant 
computing)
Lawrence Rabiner, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (digital 
signal processing: intelligent human-machine interaction, digital signal processing, 
speech processing and recognition; telecommunications)
Volkan Rodoplu, Ph.D., Stanford University, Associate Professor (wireless networks, 
energy-efficient and device-adaptive communications)
Mark J.W. Rodwell, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor, Director of Compound 
Semiconductor Research Laboratories, Director of National Nanofabrication Users 
Network (heterojunction bipolar transistors, high frequency integrated circuit design, 
electronics beyond 100 GHz)
Kenneth Rose, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Professor, Co-Director of 
Center for Information Processing Research (information theory, source and channel 
coding, image coding, communications, pattern recognition) 
Clint Schow, PhD, University of Texas, Austin, Professor (optoelectronic/electronic 
co-design and integration, equalization techniques for high-speed optical links, 
photonic switching, optoelectronic devices, integrated transceiver packaging)
Jon A. Schuller, Ph.D., Stanford University, Assistant Professor (nanophotonics, organic 
optoelectronics, plasmonics, metamaterials)
Pradeep Sen, Ph.D., Stanford University, Associate Professor (computer graphics and 
imaging)
John J. Shynk, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor (adaptive filtering, array processing, 
wireless communications, blind equalization, neural networks) 
Dmitri B. Strukov, Ph.D., Stony Brook University, Associate Professor (hybrid 
circuits, nanoelectronics, resistance switching 
devices, memristors, digital memories, 
programmable circuits, bio-inspired computing) 
Andrew Teel, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (control design and analysis for nonlinear 
dynamical systems, input-output methods, actuator nonlinearities, applications to 
aerospace problems)
Luke Theogarajan, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Associate Professor 
(low-power analog VLSI, biomimetic nanosystems, neural prostheses, biosensors, 
block co-polymer synthesis, self-assembly, and microfabrication)
Li C. Wang, Ph.D., University of Texas, Austin, Professor (design verification, testing, 
computer-aided design of microprocessors)
Yuan Xie, Ph.D., Princeton University, Professor (EDA, VLSI design, computer 
architecture, embedded systems, high-performance computing)
Robert York, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor (high-power/high-frequency 
devices and circuits, quasi-optics, antennas, electromagnetic theory, nonlinear circuits and 
dynamics, microwave photonics)
Emeriti Faculty
Steven E. Butner, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor (computer architecture, VLSI design 
of CMOS and gallium-arsenide ICs with emphasis on distributed organizations and 
fault-tolerant structures) 
Jorge R. Fontana, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor Emeritus (quantum electronics, 
particularly lasers, interaction with charged particles)
Allen Gersho, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor Emeritus, Director of Center for 
Information Processing Research (speech, audio, image, and video compression, 
quantization and signal compression techniques, and speech processing)
Arthur C. Gossard, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor Emeritus, (epitaxial crystal growth, 
artificially structured materials, semiconductor structures for optical and electronic devices, 
quantum confinement structures) *1
Glenn R. Heidbreder, D. Eng., Yale University, Professor Emeritus 
(communication theory, signal processing in radar and digital communication systems; 
digital image processing)
Evelyn Hu, Ph.D., Columbia University, Professor Emeritus, (high-resolution 
fabrication techniques for semiconductor device structures, process-related materials 
damage, contact/interface studies, superconductivity) 
*1
Ronald Iltis, Ph.D., UC San Diego, Professor (digital spread spectrum communications, 
spectral estimation and adaptive filtering)
Petar V. Kokotovic, Ph.D., USSR Academy of Sciences, Professor Emeritus, Director 
of Center for Control Engineering and Computation, Director of Center for Robust 
Nonlinear Control of Aeroengines (sensitivity analysis, singular perturbations, large-scale 
systems, non-linear systems, adaptive control, automotive and jet engine control) 
Herbert Kroemer, Dr. rer. nat., University of Göttingen, Donald W. Whittier Professor in 
Electrical Engineering, 2000 Physics Nobel 
----------------Page (32) Break----------------
32 • ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING
Laureate (general solid-state and device physics, heterostructures, molecular beam 
epitaxy, compound semiconductor materials and devices, superconductivity) 
*1
Stephen I. Long, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor Emeritus, (semiconductor devices 
and integrated circuits for high speed digital and RF analog applications)
George L. Matthaei, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor Emeritus (circuit design 
techniques for passive and active microwave, millimeter-wave and optical integrated 
circuits, circuit problems of high-speed digital integrated circuits)
P. Michael Melliar-Smith, Ph.D., University of Cambridge, Professor (fault tolerance, formal 
specification and verification, distributed systems, communication networks and 
protocols, asynchronous systems)
James L. Merz, Ph.D., Harvard University, Professor Emeritus (optical properties of 
semiconductors, including guided-wave and integrated optical devices, semiconductor 
lasers, optoelectronic devices, native defects in semiconductors, low-dimensional quantum 
structures) *1
Sanjit K. Mitra, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor Emeritus, (digital signal and image 
processing, computer-aided design and optimization)
Louise E. Moser, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin, Professor (distributed systems, 
computer networks, software engineering, fault-tolerance, formal specification and 
verification, performance evaluation)
Venkatesh Narayanamurti, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor Emeritus 
(transport, semiconductor heterostructures, nanostructures, scanning tunneling 
microscopy and ballistic electron emission microscopy, phonon physics)
Pierre M. Petroff, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (self assembling nanostructures 
in semiconductors and ferromagnetic materials, spectroscopy of nanostructures, 
nanostructure devices, semiconductor device reliability) 
*1
Ian B. Rhodes, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor Emeritus (mathematical system 
theory and its applications with emphasis on stochastic control, communication, and 
optimization problems, especially those involving decentralized information structures 
or parallel computational structures)
John G. Skalnik, D. Eng., Yale University, Professor Emeritus (solar cells, general 
device technology, effects of non-ideal structures)
Pochi Yeh, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Professor (phase conjugation, 
nonlinear optics, dynamic holography, optical computing, optical interconnection, neural 
networks, and image processing)
*1 Joint appointment with Materials*2 Joint appointment with Computer Science
Affiliated Faculty
David Awschalom, Ph.D. (Physics)
Bassam Bamieh, Ph.D. (Mechanical Engineering)
Elizabeth Belding, Ph.D. (Computer Science)
Francesco Bullo, Ph.D. (Mechanical Engineering)
Frederick Chong, Ph.D. (Computer Science)
Francis Doyle, Ph.D., (Chemical Engineering)
Chandra Krintz, Ph.D. (Computer Science)
Eric McFarland, Ph.D., (Chemical Engineering)
Shuji Nakamura, Ph.D. (Materials)
Bradley E. Paden, Ph.D. (Mechanical Engineering)
Tim Sherwood, Ph.D. (Computer Science)
Hyongsok Tom Soh, Ph.D. (Mechanical Engineering)
Matthew Turk, Ph.D. (Computer Science)
Haitao (Heather) Zheng, Ph.D. (Computer Science)
Electrical and Computer Engineering is 
a broad field encompassing many diverse 
areas such as computers and digital sys-
tems, control, communications, computer 
engineering, electronics, signal processing, 
electromagnetics, electro-optics, physics 
and fabrication of electronic and photonic 
devices. As in most areas of engineering, 
knowledge of mathematics and the natural 
sciences is combined with engineering 
fundamentals and applied to the theory, 
design, analysis, and implementation of de-
vices and systems for the benefit of society.
The Department of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering offers programs leading 
to the degrees of bachelor of science in 
electrical engineering or bachelor of sci-
ence in computer engineering. (Please 
see the “Computer Engineering” section 
for further information.) The undergradu-
ate curriculum in electrical engineering is 
designed to provide students with a solid 
background in mathematics, physical sci-
ences, and traditional electrical engineering 
topics as presented above. A wide range 
of program options, including computer 
engineering; microwaves; communica-
tions, control, and signal processing; and 
semiconductor devices and applications, 
is offered. The department’s Electrical 
Engineering undergraduate program is 
accredited by the Engineering Accredita-
tion Commission of ABET, http://www.abet.
org.  It is one of the degrees recognized 
in all fifty states as leading to eligibility for 
registration as a professional engineer.
The undergraduate major in Electrical 
Engineering prepares students for a wide 
range of positions in business, government, 
and private industrial research, develop-
ment, and manufacturing organizations. 
Students who complete a major in electri-
cal engineering may be eligible to pursue 
a California teaching credential. Interested 
students should consult the credential advi-
sor in the Graduate School of Education.
Under the direction of the Associate 
Dean for Undergraduate Studies, academic 
advising services are jointly provided by 
advisors in the College of Engineering, as 
well as advisors in the department. Stu-
dents who plan to change to a major in the 
department should consult the ECE student 
office. Departmental faculty advisors are 
assigned to students to assist them in 
choosing senior elective courses.
Counseling is provided to graduate stu-
dents through the ECE graduate advisor. 
Individual faculty members are also avail-
able for help in academic planning.
Mission Statement
The Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering seeks to provide a compre-
hensive, rigorous and accredited educa-
tional program for the graduates of Cali-
fornia’s high schools and for postgraduate 
students, both domestic and international. 
The department has a dual mission:  
• Education:  We will develop and pro-
duce excellent electrical and computer 
engineers who will support the high-tech 
economy of California and the nation. This 
mission requires that we offer a balanced 
and timely education that includes not 
only strength in the fundamental princi-
ples but also experience with the practical 
skills that are needed to contribute to the 
complex technological infrastructure of 
our society. This approach will enable 
each of our graduates to continue learn-
ing throughout an extended career.
• Research:  We will develop relevant 
and innovative science and technology 
through our research that addresses the 
needs of industry, government and the 
scientific community. This technology can 
be transferred through our graduates, 
through industrial affiliations, and through 
publications and presentations.
We provide a faculty that is committed to 
education and research, is accessible to 
students, and is highly qualified in their 
areas of expertise.
Educational Objectives
The educational objectives of the Electri-
cal Engineering Program identify what we 
hope that our graduates will accomplish 
within a few years after graduation.
1.  We expect our graduates to make 
positive contributions to society in fields 
including, but not limited to, engineering.
2.  We expect our graduates to have 
acquired the ability to be flexible and 
adaptable, showing that their educa-
tional background has given them the 
foundation needed to remain effective, 
take on new responsibilities and as-
sume leadership roles.
3.  We expect some of our graduates to 
pursue their formal education further, 
including graduate study for master’s 
and doctoral degrees.
Program Outcomes  
The EE program expects our students 
upon graduation to have:
1.  Acquired strong basic knowledge and 
skills in those fundamental areas of 
mathematics, science, and electrical 
engineering that are required to support 
specialized professional training at the 
----------------Page (33) Break----------------
ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING • 33
advanced level and to provide neces-
sary breadth to the student’s overall 
program of studies. This provides the 
basis for lifelong learning.
2.  Experienced in-depth training in state-
of-the-art specialty areas in electrical 
engineering.  This is implemented 
through our senior electives.  Students 
are required to take two sequences of 
at least two courses each at the senior 
level.
3.  Benefited from imaginative and 
highly supportive laboratory experiences 
where appropriate throughout the pro-
gram. The laboratory experience will be 
closely integrated with coursework and 
will make use of up-to-date instrumenta-
tion and computing facilities.  Students 
should experience both hardware-
oriented and simulation-oriented 
 exercises.
4.  Experienced design-oriented challenges 
that exercise and integrate skills and 
knowledge acquired in several courses.  
These may include design of compo-
nents or subsystems with performance 
specifications. Graduates should be 
able to demonstrate an ability to design 
and conduct experiments as well as 
analyze the results.
5.  Learned to function well in teams. Also, 
students must develop communication 
skills, written and oral, both through 
team and classroom experiences. Skills 
including written reports, webpage 
preparation, and public presentations 
are required.
6.  Completed a well-rounded and bal-
anced education through required 
studies in selected areas of fine arts, 
humanities, and social sciences. This 
provides for the ability to understand 
the impact of engineering solutions in a 
global and societal context.  A course in 
engineering ethics is also required of all 
undergraduates.
Undergraduate Program
Bachelor of Science—Electrical 
Engineering
A minimum of 194 units is required for 
graduation. A complete list of requirements 
for the major can be found on page 52.
Schedules should be planned to meet both 
General Education and major require-
ments.
The department academic advisor 
can suggest a recommended study plan 
for electrical engineering freshmen and 
sophomores. Each student is assigned a 
departmental faculty advisor who must be 
consulted in planning the junior and senior 
year programs.
The required 32 units (8 courses) of 
departmental electives are taken primarily 
in the senior year, and they permit students 
to develop depth in specialty areas of their 
choice. The 32 units of departmental elec-
tives must include at least 2 sequences, 
one of which must be an approved EE 
Senior Capstone Design/Project course 
sequence. A student’s elective course pro-
gram must be approved by a departmental 
faculty advisor. The advisor will check 
the program to ensure satisfaction of the 
departmental requirements. A wide variety 
of elective programs will be considered 
acceptable. 
Three matters should be noted: (1) 
students who fail to attain a grade-point 
average of at least 2.0 in the major may 
be denied the privilege of continuing in 
the major, (2) a large majority of electrical 
and computer engineering courses have 
prerequisites which must be completed 
successfully. Successful completion of pre-
requisite courses means receiving a grade 
of C- or better in prerequisite courses 
except for Mathematics 3A-B, Mathematics 
4A-B and Mathematics 6A and 6B which 
require a grade of C or better to apply 
these courses as prerequisites, (3) courses 
required for the pre-major or major, inside 
or outside of the Department of Electri-
cal Engineering, cannot be taken for the 
passed/not passed grading option. They 
must be taken for letter grades.
Bachelor of Science—Computer 
Engineering
This major is offered jointly by the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing. For information about this major, see 
page 25.
Electrical & Computer 
Engineering Courses
Many of the ECE courses are restricted to 
ECE majors only. Instructor and quarter 
offered are subject to change.
LOWER DIVISION
1A. Computer Engineering Seminar(1) STAFF
Prerequisite: Open to computer engineering majors only.  Seminar: 1 hour
Introductory seminar to expose students to a broad range of topics in Computer Engineering.
1B. Ten Puzzling Problems in Computer Engineering
(1) PARHAMIPrerequisite: Open to pre-computer engineering and 
computer engineering majors only.Not open for credit for those who have taken ECE 1
Gaining familiarity with, and motivation to study, the field of computer engineering, through puzzle-
like problems that represent a range of challenges facing computer engineers in their daily problem-
solving efforts and at the frontiers of research.
2A. Circuits, Devices, and Systems(5) YORK
Prerequisites: Mathematics 3A-B, and Mathematics 3C or 4A with a minimum grade of C; and, 
Mathematics 5A or 4B with a minimum grade of C (may be taken concurrently); Physics 3 or 23 
(may be taken concurrently); open to electrical engineering, computer engineering, and pre-
computer engineering majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 4 hours.
Introduction to basic circuit analysis. KCL, KVL, nodal analysis, superposition, independent and 
dependent sources; diodes and I-V characteristics; 
basic op-amp circuits; first-order transient analysis; AC analysis and phasors. Introduction to the use of 
test instruments.
2B. Circuits, Devices, and Systems(5) YORK
Prerequisites: ECE 2A with a grade of C- or better;  open to electrical engineering, computer 
engineering, and pre-computer engineering majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 4 hours.
Second order circuits. Laplace transform and solution of steady state and transient circuit 
problems in the s-domain; Bode plots; Fourier series and transforms; filters. Transistor as a switch; load 
lines; simple logic gates; latches and flip-flops.
2C. Circuits, Devices, and Systems(5) YORK
Prerequisites: ECE 2B with a grade of C- or better (may be taken concurrently); open to electrical 
engineering, computer engineering, and pre-computer engineering majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; 
laboratory, 4 hours.Two-port network parameters; small-signal 
models of nonlinear devices; transistor amplifier circuits; frequency response of amplifiers; non-ideal 
op-amps; modulation, bandwidth, signals; Fourier analysis.
4. Design Project for Freshmen  
(4) STAFFPrerequisites: Mathematics 3A-B and Mathematics 
3C or 4A and Physics 1 with minimum grades of C; Engineering 3 with a minimum grade of C-. Lecture, 
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.This first course on design gives an intuitive 
introduction to engineering design. Learn how to take an idea of a system and convert it to a working 
model. Use hardware and software for building a system.
5. Introduction to Electrical & Computer Engineering
 (4) STAFF Prerequisite: Open only to Electrical Engineering 
majors.  Lecture: 2 hours; Laboratory: 3 hours     Aims at exposing freshmen students to the 
different sub-fields within Electric and Computer Engineering. Composed of lectures by different 
faculty members and a weekly laboratory based on projects that are executed using the Arduino 
environment. 
10A. Foundations of Analog and Digital Circuits & Systems
 (3) STAFF Prerequisite: Mathematics 3A-B, and Mathematics 
4A or 3C with a minimum grade of C; and, Math 4B or 5A with a minimum grade of C (may be 
taken concurrently); Physics 3 or 23 (may be taken concurrently); open only to electrical engineering 
and computer engineering majors.  Lecture: 3 hours     Not open for credit for those who have received a 
C- or higher in ECE 2A.      The objective of the course is to establish the 
foundations of analog and digital circuits. The course will introduce the student to the power of abstraction, 
resistive networks, network analysis, nonlinear analysis and the digital abstraction. (F)
10AL. Foundations of Analog and Digital Circuits and Systems Lab
 (2) STAFF Prerequisite: ECE 10A (may be taken concurrently) 
with a C- or better grade.  Laboratory: 4 hours     Not open for credit for those who have received a 
C- or higher in ECE 2A.      The goal of 10AL is to provide the student with 
a hands-on application of the concepts discussed in ECE 10A. The lab will introduce the use of 
microcontrollers as a data acquisition system, network analysis, resistors, nonlinear analysis and 
digital abstraction.
10B. Foundations of Analog and Digital Circuits and Systems
 (3) STAFF Prerequisite: ECE 10A with a C- or better grade.  
Lecture: 3 hours
----------------Page (34) Break----------------
34 • ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING
     Not open for credit for those who have received a C- or higher in ECE 2B. 
     The objective of the course is to introduce the MOSFET both as a simple digital switch and as 
controlled current source for analog design. The course will cover basic digital design, small-signal 
analysis, charge storage elements and operational amplifiers. (W)
10BL. Foundations of Analog and Digital Circuits and Systems Lab
 (2) STAFF Prerequisite: ECE 10B (may be taken concurrently) 
with a C- or better grade.  Laboratory: 4 hours    Not open for credit for those who have received a 
C- or higher in ECE 2B.      The goal of 10BL is to provide the student with 
a hands- on application of the concepts discussed in ECE 10B. The lab will utilize the microcontroller 
to introduce students to the understanding of datasheets for both digital and analog 
circuits, single-stage amplifier design and basic instrumentation.
10C. Foundations of Analog and Digital Circuits and Systems
 (3) STAFF Prerequisite: ECE 10B with a C- or better grade.  
Lecture: 3 hours     Not open for credit for those who have received a 
C- or higher in ECE 2C.      The objective of the course is to introduce the 
student to the basics of transient analysis. The course will energy and power dissipation in digital 
circuits, first-order and second-order linear time invariant circuits, sinusoidal steady state, impedance 
representation, feedback and resonance. (S)
10CL. Foundations of Analog and Digital Circuits and Systems Lab
 (2) STAFF Prerequisite: ECE 10C (may be taken concurrently) 
with a C- grade or better.  Laboratory: 4 hours     Not open for credit for those who have received a 
C- or higher in ECE 2C.      The goal of 10CL is to provide the student with 
a hands- on application of the concepts discussed in ECE 10C. The lab will utilize the microcontroller 
to introduce students to the understanding of propagation delay in digital circuits and the resulting 
power dissipation, first order linear networks, second order linear networks, sinusoidal steady-state, 
impedance analysis and op-amp circuits.
15A. Fundamentals of Logic Design(4) MAREK-SADOWSKA
Prerequisites: Open to electrical engineering, computer engineering, and pre-computer 
engineering majors only. Not open for credit to students who have 
completed ECE 15. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Boolean algebra, logic of propositions, minterm and maxterm expansions, Karnaugh maps, 
Quine-McCluskey methods, melti-level circuits, combinational circuit design and simulation, 
multiplexers, decoders, programmable logic devices.
92. Projects in Electrical and Computer Engineering
(4) STAFFPrerequisite: Consent of instructor; for Electrical 
Engineering and Computer Engineering majors only     Projects in electrical and computer engineering 
for advanced undergraduate students.
94AA-ZZ. Group Studies in Electrical and Computer Engineering  
(1-4) STAFFPrerequisite: consent of instructor.  
Group studies intended for small number of advanced students who share an interest in a topic 
not included in the regular departmental curriculum.
96. Undergraduate Research
(2-4) STAFFPrerequisite: Consent of instructor. Must have a 3.00 
GPA. May be repeated for up to 12 units.Research opportunities for undergraduate 
students. students will be expected to give regular 
oral presentations, actively participate in a weekly seminar, and prepare at least one written report on 
their research.
UPPER DIVISION
120A. Integrated Circuit Design and Fabrication
 (4) BOWERS Prerequisite: ECE 132 with a minimum grade of C-.  
Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hours     Not open for credit for those who have taken ECE 
124B.      Theory, fabrication, and characterization of solid 
state devices including P-N junctions, capacitors, bipolar and MOS devices. Devices are fabricated 
using modern VLSI processing techniques including lithography, oxidation, diffusion, and evaporation. 
Physics and performance of processing steps are discussed and analyzed.
120B. Integrated Circuit Design and Fabrication
 (4) BOWERS Prerequisite: ECE 2ABC and either ECE 124B or 
ECE 120A with a minimum grade of C- or better in each of the courses.  Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 
3 hours     Not open for credit to those who have taken ECE 
124C.      Design, simulation, fabrication, and 
characterization of NMOS integrated circuits. Circuit design and layout is performed using commercial 
layout software. Circuits are fabricated using modern VLSI processing techniques. Circuit and discrete 
device electrical performance are analyzed.
121A. The Practice of Science 
(3) HU, AWSCHALOM Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
Same course as Physics 121A.Provides experience in pursuing careers within 
science and engineering through discussions with researchers, lectures on ethics, funding, intellectual 
property, and commercial innovation. Students prepare a focused research proposal that is pursued 
in the second quarter of the course.
121B. The Practice of Science 
(4) HU, AWSCHALOM Prerequisite: ECE 121A or Physics 121A; consent 
of instructor.Same course as Physics 121B.
Provides experience in pursuing careers within science and engineering through discussions with 
researchers, lectures on ethics, funding, intellectual property, and commercial innovation. Students 
prepare a focused research proposal that is pursued in the second quarter of the course.
122A. VLSI Principles 
(4) BANERJEE Prerequisite: ECE 152A with a minimum grade of C-. 
Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hours     Not open for credit for those who have taken ECE 
124A or ECE 123.      Introduction to CMOS digital VLSI design: 
CMOS devices and manufacturing technology; transistor level design of static and dynamic logic 
gates and components and interconnections; circuit characterization: delay, noise margins, and power 
dissipation; combinational and sequential circuits; arithmetic operations and memories.
122B. VLSI Architecture and Design 
(4) BREWER Prerequisite: ECE 124A or ECE 123 or ECE 122A 
with a minimum grade of C-. Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 2 hours
    Not open for credit for those who have taken ECE 124D. 
     Practical issues in VLSI circuit design, pad/pin limitations, clocking and interfacing standards, 
electrical packaging for high-speed and high-performance design. On-chip noise and crosstalk, 
clock and power distribution, architectural and circuit design constraints, interconnection limits and 
transmission line effects.
123. High-Performance Digital Circuit Design 
(4) THEOGARAJAN Prerequisite: ECE 2A-B-C with a minimum grade of 
C- in each of those courses; open to both electrical engineering and computer engineering majors only.
Not open for credit for those who have taken ECE 124A or ECE 122A.
Introduction to high-performance digital circuit design techniques. Basics of device physics 
including deep submicron effects; device sizing and logical effort; Circuit design styles; clocking & timing 
issues; memory & datapath design; Low-power design; VLSI design flows and associated EDA tools
125. High Speed Digital Integrated Circuit Design
(4) BANERJEEPrerequisite: ECE 124A or 137A with a minimum 
grade of C- in either. Lecture, 4 hours.Advanced digital VLSI design: CMOS scaling, 
nanoscale issues including variability, thermal management, interconnects, reliability; non-clocked, 
clocked and self-timed logic gates; clocked storage elements; high-speed components, PLLs and DLLs; 
clock and power distribution; memory systems; signaling and I/O design; low-power design. 
130A. Signal Analysis and Processing (4) MADHOW 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 4B or 5A with a minimum of grade of C and ECE 2B with a minimum grade of 
C-; open to EE and computer engineering majors only. Lecture: 3 hours; Discussion: 2 hours
     Analysis of continuous time linear systems in the time and frequency domains. Superposition 
and convolution. Bilateral and unilateral Laplace transforms. Fourier series and Fourier transforms. 
Filtering, modulation, and feedback.
130B. Signal Analysis and Processing(4) CHANDRASEKARAN
Prerequisite: ECE 130A with a grade of C- or better; open to EE and computer engineering majors only. 
Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.Analysis of discrete time linear systems in the 
time and frequency domains. Z transforms, Discrete Fourier transforms. Sampling and aliasing. 
130C. Signal Analysis and Processing(4) CHANDRASEKARAN
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B with a minimum grade of C- in both. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
Basic techniques for the analysis of linear models in electrical engineering: Gaussian elimination, 
vector spaces and linear equations, orthogonality, determinants, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, 
systems of linear differential equations, positive definite matrices, singular value decomposition.
132. Introduction to Solid-State Electronic Devices
 (4) MISHRA Prerequisite: Physics 4 or 24 with a minimum grade 
of C-; Mathematics 4B or 5A with a minimum grade of C; and, ECE 2A-B (may be taken concurrently) 
with a minimum grade of C- in each; open to EE and computer engineering majors only.  Lecture: 3 hours; 
Discussion: 2 hoursElectrons and holes in semiconductors; doping 
(P and N); state occupation statistics, transport properties of electrons and holes; P-N junction 
diodes; I-V, C-V, and switching properties of P-N junctions; introduction of bipolar transitors, 
MOSFET’s and JFET’s. 
134. Introduction to Fields and Waves (4) DAGLI, YORK 
Prerequisite: Physics 3 or 23 with a minimum grade of C-; Mathematics 4B or 5A and Mathematics 
5B or 6A with a minimum grade of C in each; and Mathematics 5C or 6B with a minimum grade of C-; 
open to EE and computer engineering majors only  Lecture: 3 hours; Discussion: 2 hours. 
    Introduction to applied electromagnetics and wave phenomena in high frequency electron circuits and 
systems. Waveson transmission-lines, elements of electrostatics and magnetostatics and appications, 
plane waves, examples and applications to RF, microwave, and optical systems.
----------------Page (35) Break----------------
ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING • 35
135. Optical Fiber Communication(4) DAGLI
Prerequisites: ECE 132 and 134 with a minimum grade of C- in both. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 
hour.Optical fiber as a transmission medium, 
dispersion and nonlinear effects in fiber transmission, fiber and semiconductor optical 
amplifiers and lasers, optical modulators, photo detectors, optical receivers, wavelength division 
multiplexing components, optical filters, basic transmission system analysis and design.
137A. Circuits and Electronics I(4) RODWELL
Prerequisites: ECE 2A-B-C, 130A, and 132 with a minimum grade of C- in all; open to EE majors only. 
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.Analysis and design of single stage and 
multistage transistor circuits including biasing, gain, impedances and maximum signal levels.
137B. Circuits and Electronics II(4) RODWELL
Prerequisites: ECE 2C and 137A with a minimum grade of C- in both; open to EE majors only. Lecture, 
3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.Analysis and design of single stage and 
multistage transistor circuits at low and high frequencies. Transient response. Analysis and 
design of feedback circuits. Stability criteria.
139. Probability and Statistics(4) ILTIS
Prerequisite: Open to Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering and pre-Computer 
Engineering majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
Fundamentals of probability, conditional probability, Bayes rule, random variables, functions 
of random variables, expectation and high-order moments, Markov chains, hypothesis testing.
141A. Introduction To Nanoelectro-mechanical and Microelectromechanical 
Systems(NEMS/MEMS)(3) PENNATUR, TURNER
Prerequisites: ME 16 & 17, ME 152A, ME 151A (may be concurrent); or, ECE 130A and 137A with a 
minimum grade of C- in both. Introduction to nano- and microtechnology. 
Scaling laws and nanoscale physics are stressed. Individual subjects at the nanoscale including 
materials, mechanics, photonics, electronics, and fluidics will be described, with an emphasis on 
differences of behavior at the nanoscale and real-world examples.
141B. MEMS: Processing and Device Characterization
(4) PENNATHUR, TURNERPrerequisites: ME 141A, ME 163 (may be 
concurrent); or ECE 141A.Lectures and laboratory on semiconductor-
based processing for MEMS. Description of key equipment and characterization tools used for 
MEMS and design, fabrication, characterization and testing of MEMS Emphasis on current MEMS 
devices including accelerometers, comb drives, micro-reactors and capacitor-actuators. (W)
142. Introduction to Power Electronics(4) YORK
Prerequisite: ECE 132, ECE 134, and ECE 137A with a minimum grade of C- in all; open to EE majors 
only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 2 hours.An introduction to modern switched-mode power 
electronics and associated devices. Covers modern converter/inverter topologies for the control and 
conversion of electrical power with high efficiency with applications in power supplies, renewable 
energy systems, lighting, electric/hybrid vehicles, and motor drivers.
144. Electromagnetic Fields and Waves(4) YORK
Prerequisite: ECE 134 with a minimum grade of C-. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Waves on transmission lines, Maxwell’s equations, skin effect, propagation and reflection of 
electromagnetic waves, microwave integrated circuit 
principles, metal and dielectric waveguides, resonant cavities, antennas. Microwave and optical device 
examples and experience with modern microwave and CAD software.
145A. Communication Electronics(5) RODWELL
Prerequisites: ECE 137A-B with a minimum grade of C- in both. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
RF/Microwave circuits. Transistor, transmission-line, and passive element characteristics. 
Transmission-line theory and impedance matching. Amplifier design for maximum available 
gain. Amplifier stability. Gain compression and power limits. Introduction to noise figure, and to 
intermodulation distortion.
145B. Communication Electronics II(5) STAFF
Prerequisite: ECE 145A with a minimum grade of C-; EE majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 
hours.RF models for CMOS and BJT. Discrete vs. 
IC implementation. On-chip passive components. LNAs. PAs. T/R switches. Mixers. VCOs. Poly-
phase filters Radio link budget. Analog and digital modulation schemes. Introduction to receiver 
architectures. I&Q modulation. Image-reject architectures.
145C. Communication Electronics III(5) YUE
Prerequisites: ECE 145B with a minimum grade of C-. Lecture, 4 hours.
Modern wireless communication standards. Cellular phone. Wireless LAN. Introduction to multi-
access techniques. Advanced modulation schemes. Interference and distortion. Modern transceiver 
architectures. Direct conversion vs. low IF vs. superheterodyne. Sub-sampling receiver. Direct 
polar modulator. Frequency synthesis using PLL.
146A. Communication Systems (5) MADHOW 
Prerequisite: ECE 130A-B with a minimum grade of C-; open to EE majors only.  Lecture: 3 hours; 
Laboratory: 6 hoursCommunication signals and systems; channel 
modeling and transceiver signal processing in complex baseband; analog communication 
techniques, including amplitude and angle modulation, superheterodyne reception, and 
phase locked loops; digital modulation, including bandwidth-efficient linear modulation and orthogonal 
modulation.
146B. DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEM DESIGN
 (5) MADHOW Prerequisite: ECE 130A-B and 146A with minimum 
grades of C-; open to EE majors only.  Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 6 hours
Statistical modeling of signals and noise, including review of probability and random variables, 
and introduction to random processes; Optimal demodulation, including signal pace geometry 
and performance estimates; communication over dispersive channels using singlecarrier and 
multicarrier modulation.
147A. Feedback Control Systems - Theory and Design
(5) TEEL, SMITHPrerequisites: ECE 130A-B-C with a minimum grade 
of C- in each; open to EE and computer engineering majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
Feedback systems design, specifications in time and frequency domains. Analysis and synthesis of 
closed loop systems. Computer aided analysis and design. 
147B. Digital Control Systems - Theory and Design
(5) SMITH, TEELPrerequisite: ECE 147A with a minimum grade of C-; 
open to EE and computer engineering majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
Analysis of sampled data feedback systems; state space description of linear systems; 
observability, controllability, pole assignment, state feedback, observers. Design of digital control 
systems. (W)
147C. Control System Design Project(5) HESPANHA
Prerequisite: ECE 147A or ME 155B or ME 173 with a minimum grade of C-. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 
6 hours.Students are required to design, implement, and 
document a significant control systems project. The project is implemented in hardware or in high-fidelity 
numerical simulators. Lectures and laboratories cover special topics related to the practical 
implementation of control systems.
148. Applications of Signal Analysis and Processing
 (4) LEE Prerequisite: ECE 130A and 130B with a minimum 
grade of C- in both.  Lecture: 3 hours; Discussion: 2 hours
     Recommended Preparation: concurrent enrollment in ECE 130C.
     A sequence of engineering applications of signal analysis and processing techniques; in 
communications, image processing, analog and digital filter design, signal detection and parameter 
estimation, holography and tomography, Fourier optics, and microwave and acoustic sensing.
150. Mobile Embedded Systems
(4) CHENGPrerequisite: Proficiency in JAVA programming. 
Architectures of modern smartphones and their key hardware components including mobile 
application processors, communications chips, display, touchscreen, graphics, camera, battery, 
GPS,and various sensors; the OS and software development platform of smartphones; smartphone 
applications; low power design techniques. 
151. Distributed Systems(4) MELLIAR-SMITH
Prerequisite: Computer Science 170 with a minimum grade of C-. 
Not open for credit to students who have completed Computer Science 171. Lecture, 3 hours; 
discussion, 1 hour.Distributed systems architecture, distributed 
programming techniques, message passing, remote procedure calls, group communication 
and membership, naming, asynchrony, causality, consistency, fault-tolerance and recovery, resource 
management, scheduling, monitoring, testing and debugging.
152A. Digital Design Principles (5) RODOPLU 
Prerequisite: ECE 15A and 2A, or Computer Science 30 or 64 with a minimum grade of C- in each 
course; open to electrical engineering, computer engineering, and computer science majors only.  
Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 6 hours     Design of synchronous digital systems: timing 
diagrams, propagation delay, latches and flip-flops, shift registers and counters, Mealy/Moore finite state 
machines, Verilog, 2-phase clocking, timing analysis, CMOS implementation, S- RAM, RAM-based 
designs, ASM charts, state minimization.
153A. Hardware/Software Interface(4) BREWER, KRINTZ
Prerequisite: Upper division standing in ComputerEngineering, Computer Science or Electrical
Engineering.Same course as Computer Science 153A.
Issues in interfacing computing systems and software to practical I/O interfaces. Rapid response, 
real-time events and management of tasks, threads, and scheduling required for efficient design of 
embedded software and systems is discussed. Techniques for highly constrained systems. 
153B. Sensor and Peripheral Interface Design (4) STAFF 
Prerequisite: ECE 152A with a minimum grade of C-.  Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hours
Hardware description languages; field-programmable logic and ASIC design techniques. 
Mixed-signal techniques: A/D and D/A converter interfaces; video and audio signal acquisition, 
processing and generation, communication and 
----------------Page (36) Break----------------
36 • ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING
network interfaces.
154A. Introduction to Computer Architecture (4) PARHAMI 
Prerequisite: ECE 152A with a minimum grade of C-; open to EE and CMPEN majors only.  Lecture: 3 
hours; Discussion: 1 hour     Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Computer Science 154. ECE 154A is the formerly numbered ECE 154. Students who have 
taken ECE 154 and have received a grade of C- or lower may take ECE 154A for a better grade.
     Students who have taken ECE 154 and have received a grade of C- or lower may take ECE 154A 
for a better grade.      Instruction-set architecture (ISA) and computer 
performance; Machine instructions, assembly, addressing modes; Memory map,arrays, pointers; 
Procedure calls; Number formats; Simple ALUs; Data path,control, microprogram; Buses, I/O 
programming, interrupts; Pipelined data paths and control schemes.
154B. Advanced Computer Architecture (4) STRUKOV 
Prerequisite: ECE 154A with a C- grade or better. Open to EE and CMPEN majors only.  Lecture: 3 
hours; Laboratory: 4 hours     Not open for credit to those who have taken 
Computer Science 154.     ISA variations; Pipeline data and control hazards; 
Fast ALU design; Instruction-level parallelism, multithreading, VLIW; Vector and array processing, 
multi/many-core chips; Cache and virtual memory; Disk arrays; Shared- and distributed-memory 
systems, supercomputers; Reconfigurable and application-specific circuits. 
155A. Introduction to Computer Networks (4) MOSER 
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing in Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering and Computer 
Science; and CMPSC 24 with a minimum grade of C-.  Lecture: 3 hours; Discussion 1 hour
     Not open for credit to students who have completed Computer Science 176, 176A, or ECE 
155.     Topics in this course include network 
architectures, protocols, wired and wireless networks, transmission media, multiplexing, 
switching, framing, error detection and correction, flow control, routing, congestion control, TCP/IP, 
DNS, email, World Wide Web, network security, socket programming in C/C++.
155B. Network Computing (4) MOSER 
Prerequisite: ECE 155A or CMPSC 176A with a minimum grade of C-; and CMPSC 32 with a 
minimum grade of C- ; and experience in Java programming or consent of instructor.  Lecture: 3 
hours; Discussion 1 hour     Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Computer Science 176B or ECE 194W.     Topics in this course include client/server 
computing, threads, Java applets, Java sockets, Java RMI, Java servlets, Java Server Pages, Java 
Database Connectivity, Enterprise Java Beans, Hypertext Markup Language, eXtensible Markup 
Language, Web Services, programming networked applications in Java.
156A. Digital Design with VHDL and Synthesis
(4) WANGPrerequisite: ECE 152A with a minimum grade of C-. 
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.Introduction to VHDL basic elements. VHDL 
simulation concepts. VHDL concurrent statements with examples and applications. VHDL subprograms, 
packages, libraries and design units. Writing VHDL for synthesis. Writing VHDL for finite state machines. 
Design case study. 
156B. Computer-Aided Design of VLSI Circuits
(4) WANGPrerequisite: ECE 156A with a minimum grade of C-. 
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.Introduction to computer-aided simulation and 
synthesis tools for VLSI. VLSI system design flow, role of CAD tools, layout synthesis, circuit simulation, 
logic simulation, logic synthesis, behavior synthesis and test synthesis. 
158. Digital Signal Processing(4) GIBSON
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B with a minimum grade of C- in both; open to EE majors only.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.Discrete signals and systems, convolution, 
z-transforms, discrete Fourier transforms, digital filters.
160. Multimedia Systems (4) MELLIAR-SMITH 
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing; open to electrical engineering, computer engineering, 
computer science, and creative studies majors only.  Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hours
     Not open for credit to students who have completed CMPSC 182.
     Introduction to multimedia and applications, including WWW, image/video databases and 
video streaming. Covers media content analysis, media data organization and indexing (image/
video databases), and media data distribution and interaction (video-on-demand and interactive TV).
162A. The Quantum Description of Electronic Materials
(4) STAFFPrerequisites: ECE 130A-B and 134 with a minimum 
grade of C- in all; open to EE and materials majors only. 
Same course as Materials 162A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Electrons as particles and waves, Schrodinger’s equation and illustrative solutions. Tunnelling. Atomic 
structure, the exclusion principle and the periodic table. Bonds. Free electrons in metals, periodic 
potentials and energy bands.
162B. Fundamentals of the Solid State(4) COLDREN
Prerequisite: ECE 162A with a minimum grade of C-; open to EE and materials majors only.
Same course as Materials 162B. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Crystal lattices and the structure of solids, with emphasis on semiconductors. Lattice vibrations, 
electronic states and energy bands. Electrical and thermal conduction. Dielectric and optical properties. 
Semiconductor devices: diffusion, p-n junctions and diode behavior. 
162C. Optoelectronic Materials and Devices(4) COLDREN
Prerequisites: ECE 162A-B with a minimum grade of C-; open to electrical engineering and materials 
majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.Optical transitions in solids. Direct and indirect 
gap semiconductors. Luminescence. Excitons and photons. Fundamentals of optoelectronic devices: 
semiconductor lasers, Led’s photoconductors, solar cells, photo diodes, modulators. Photoemission. 
Integrated circuits. 
178. Introduction to Digital Image and Video Processing
(4) MANJUNATHPrerequisites: open to EE, computer engineering, 
and computer science majors with upper-division standing. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Basic concepts in image and video processing. Topics include image formation and sampling, image 
transforms, image enhancement, and image and video compression including JPEG and MPEG 
coding standards.
179D. Introduction to Robotics: Dynamics and Control
(4) BYLPrerequisites: ECE 130A or ME 155A (may be taken 
concurrently).Same course as ME 179D.
Dynamic modeling and control methods for robotic systems. LaGrangian method for deriving 
equations of motion, introduction to the Jacobian, 
and modeling and control of forces and contact dynamics at a robotic end effector. Laboratories 
encourage a problem-solving approach to control. 
179P. Introduction to Robotics: Planning and Kinematics
(4) BULLOPrerequisites: ENGR 3; and either ME 17 or ECE 
130C (may be taken concurrently). Not open for credit to student who have completed Mechanical 
Engineering 170A or ECE 181A.Same course as ME 179P.
Motion planning and kinematics topics with an emphasis on geometric reasoning, 
programming, and matrix computations. Motion planning: configuration spaces, sensor-based 
planning, decomposition and sampling methods, and advanced planning algorithms. Kinematics: 
reference frames, rotations and displacements, kinematic motion models. 
181B. Introduction to Computer Vision (4) MANJUNATH 
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing in Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering, Computer 
Science, Chemical Engineering or Mechanical Engineering.  Lecture: 3 hours; Discussion: 1 hour
Same course as Computer Science 181B.     Overview of computer vision problems and 
techniques for analyzing the content of images and video. Topics include image formation, edge 
detection, image segmentation, pattern recognition, texture analysis, optical flow, stereo vision, shape 
representation and recovery techniques, issues in object recognition, and case studies of practical 
vision systems.
183. Nonlinear Phenomena(4) STAFF
Prerequisites: Physics 105A or ME 163 or upper-division standing in EE. 
Same course as Physics 106 and ME 169. Not open for credit to students who have completed ECE 
163C. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.An introduction to nonlinear phenomena. Flows 
and bifurcations in one and two dimensions, chaos, fractals, strange attractors. Applications to physics, 
engineering, chemistry, and biology.
188A. Senior Electrical Engineering Project (3) STAFF 
Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.  Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hours
Student groups design a significant project based on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier 
coursework and integrate their technical knowledge through a practical design experience. The project is 
evaluated through written reports, oral presentations, and demonstrations of performance.
188B. Senior Electrical Engineering Project (3) STAFF 
Prerequisite: ECE 188A with a minimum grade of C-.  Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hours
Student groups design a significant project based on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier 
coursework and integrate their technical knowledge through a practical design experience. The project is 
----------------Page (37) Break----------------
MATERIALS • 37
evaluated through written reports, oral presentations, and demonstrations of performance.
188C. Senior Electrical Engineering Project (3) STAFF 
Prerequisite: ECE 188B with a minimum grade of C-. Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hour
Student groups design a significant project based on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier 
coursework and integrate their technical knowledge through a practical design experience. The project is 
evaluated through written reports, oral presentations, and demonstrations of performance.
189A. Senior Computer Systems Project (4) STAFF 
Prerequisite: ECE 153B; senior standing in Computer Engineering, Computer Science or EE.  
Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hoursNot open for credit to students who have 
completed Computer Science 189A-B.     Student groups design a significant computer-
based project. Groups work independently with interaction among groups via interface specifications 
and informal meetings.
189B. Senior Computer Systems Project (4) STAFF 
Prerequisite: ECE 189A; senior standing in Computer Engineering, Computer Science or EE.  
Lecture: 3 hours; Laboratory: 3 hoursNot open for credit to students who have 
completed Computer Science 189A-B.     Student groups design a significant computer-
based project. Groups work independently with interaction among groups via interface specifications 
and informal meetings.
192. Projects in Electrical and Computer Engineering
(4) STAFFPrerequisite: consent of instructor. Discussion, 2 
hours; laboratory, 6 hours.Projects in electrical and computer engineering 
for advanced undergraduate students. 
193. Internship in Industry(1-8) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of department.Must have a 3.0 grade-point-average. May not 
be used as departmental electives. May be repeated to a maximum of 12 units. Field, 1-8 hours.
Special projects for selected students. Offered in conjunction with engineering practice in selected 
industrial and research firms, under direct faculty supervision. 
194AA-ZZ. Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering  
(1-5) STAFFPrerequisite: consent of instructor. Variable hours.
Group studies intended for small number of advanced students who share an interest in a topic 
not included in the regular departmental curriculum. Topics covered include (check with department 
for quarters offered): A. Circuits; AA. Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems; B. Systems Theory; 
BB. Computer Engineering; C. Communication Systems; D. Control Systems; E. Signal 
Processing; F. Solid State; G. Fields and Waves; H. Quantum Electronics; I. Microwave Electronics; 
J. Switching Theory; K. Digital Systems Design; L. Computer Architecture; M. Computer Graphics; 
N. Pattern Recognition; O. Microprocessors and Microprocessor-based Systems; P. Simulation; 
Q. Imaging Systems and Image Processing; R. General; S. Speech; T. Robot Control; U. 
Optoelectronics; V. Scientific Computation; W. Computer Network; X. Distributed Computation; Y. 
Numerical Differential Equations; Z. Nanotechnology
196. Undergraduate Research(2-4) STAFF
Prerequisites: upper-division standing; consent of instructor. 
Must have a minimum 3.0 grade-point average for the preceding three quarters. May be repeated 
for up to 12 units. Not more than 4 units may be applied to departmental electives.
Research opportunities for undergraduate students. Students will be expected to give regular 
oral presentations, actively participate in a weekly seminar, and prepare at least one written report on 
their research. 
199. Independent Studies in Electrical and Computer Engineering
(1-5) STAFFPrerequisites: upper division standing; completion 
of two upper-division courses in electrical and computer engineering; consent of instructor. 
Must have a minimum 3.0 grade-point average for the preceding three quarters. Students are limited 
to five units per quarter and 30 units total in all 98/99/198/199/199DC/199RA courses combined. 
Directed individual study, normally experimental.
GRADUATE COURSES
Graduate courses for this major can be found in the UCSB General Catalog.
Engineering 
Sciences
Engineering Sciences, Office of Associate Dean for Undergraduate Studies, Harold 
Frank Hall, Room 1006;  Telephone (805) 893-2809 
Web site:   http://engrsci.ucsb.edu
Chair & Associate Dean: Glenn E. Beltz
Faculty
Glenn E. Beltz, Ph.D., Harvard, Professor
Jeffrey M. Moehlis, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, Professor
Linda R. Petzold, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Professor
The Engineering Sciences program at 
UCSB serves as a focal point for the 
cross-disciplinary educational environment 
that prevails in each of our five degree-
granting undergraduate programs (chemi-
cal engineering, computer engineering, 
computer science, electrical engineering, 
and mechanical engineering).  The courses 
offered in this “department” are designed 
to cultivate well-educated, innovative 
engineers and scientists with excellent 
management and entrepreneurial skills and 
attitudes oriented to new technologies.
One of the missions of the Engineering 
Sciences program is to provide coursework 
commonly needed across other education-
al programs in the College of Engineering.  
For example, courses in computer pro-
gramming, computation, ethics, engineer-
ing writing, engineering economics, science 
communication to the public, and even an 
aeronautics-inspired art course are offered.
Engineering 
Sciences Courses
LOWER DIVISION
3. Introduction to Programming for Engineers(3) MOEHLIS, PETZOLD
Prerequisites: Open to chemical engineering, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering 
majors only.General philosophy of programming and 
problem solving. Students will be introduced to the programming language MATLAB. Specific areas 
of study will include algorithms, basic decision structures, arrays, matrices, and graphing. (F, S, M).
99. Introduction to Research(1-3) STAFF
Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.May be repeated for credit to a maximum of 6 
units. Students are limited to 5 units per quarter and 30 units total in all 98/99/198/199/199AA-ZZ 
courses combined. Directed study to be arranged with individual faculty members. Course offers 
exceptional students an opportunity to participate in a research group.
UPPER DIVISION
101. Ethics in Engineering(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: senior standing in engineering. The nature of moral value, normative judgment, 
and moral reasoning. Theories of moral value. The engineer’s role in society. Ethics in professional 
practice. Safety, risk, responsibility. Morality and career choice. Code of ethics. Case studies will 
facilitate the comprehension of the concepts introduced. (W,S,M)
103. Advanced Engineering Writing(4) STAFF
Prerequisites: Writing 50 or 50E; upper-division standing.
Practice in the forms of communication—contractual reports, proposals, conference papers, 
oral presentations, business plans—that engineers and entrepreneurial engineers will encounter in 
professional careers. Focus is on research methods, developing a clear and persuasive writing style, and 
electronic document preparation.
160. Science for the Public(1-4) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.Same course as Physics 160K. Open to graduate 
students in science and engineering disciplines and to undergraduate science and engineering majors. .
Provides experience in communicating science and technology to nonspecialists. The 
major components of the course are field work in mentoring, a biweekly seminar, presentations to 
precollege students and to adult nonscientists, and end-of-term research papers.
----------------Page (38) Break----------------
38 • MATERIALS
177. Art and Science of Aerospace Culture(4) STAFF
Prerequisites: upper-division standing; consent of instructor.
Same course as Art Studio 177.Interdisciplinary course/seminar/practice for 
artists, academics, engineers, and designers interested in exploring the technological aesthetic, 
cultural, and political aspects of the space side of the aerospace complex. Design history, space 
complex aesthetics, cinema intersections, imaging/telecommunications, human spaceflight history, 
reduced/alternating gravity experimentation, space systems design/utilization.
199. Independent Studies in Engineering(1-5) STAFF
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing; consent of instructor.
Students must have a minimum 3.0 GPA for the preceding three quarters. May be repeated for credit 
to a maximum of 10 units. Directed individual study.
GRADUATE COURSES
A graduate course listing can be found in the UCSB General Catalog.
Materials
Department of Materials Engineering II, Room 1355;  
Telephone (805) 893-4601
Web site: www.materials.ucsb.edu
Chair: Tresa M. Pollock Vice Chair: Michael L. Chabinyc
Faculty
Guillermo C. Bazan, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (polymer 
synthesis, photophysics) *5
Matthew R. Begley, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara, Professor 
(mechanics of materials with applications to multilayered devices such as microfluidics, 
MEMS and protective coatings)
Irene J. Beyerlein, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor (computational materials science, 
microstructure-property relationships, deformation mechanisms, composites)
John Bowers, Ph.D., Stanford, Professor (energy efficiency, optical devices and 
networks, silicon photonics) *1
Michael Chabinyc, Ph.D., Stanford University, Associate Professor (organic 
semiconductors, thin film electronics, energy conversion using photovoltaics, 
characterization of thin films of polymers, x-ray scattering from polymers)
Larry A. Coldren, Ph.D., Stanford University, Kavli Professor in Optoelectronics and 
Sensors, Director of Optoelectronics Technology Center (semiconductor integrated 
optics, optoelectronics, molecular beam epitaxy, microfabrication)
 *1
Steven P. DenBaars, Ph.D., University of 
Southern California, Professor (metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) of semi-
conductors, IR to blue lasers and LEDs, high power electronic materials and devices) 
*1
Daniel S. Gianola, Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University, Associate Professor 
(nanomechanical behavior and deformation mechanisms in ultra-strong materials, 
mechanics of disordered materials, elastic strain engineering of transport phenomena, 
tunable and efficient solid state energy conversion, interface engineering of 
nanocrystalline materials for mechanical stability and damage tolerance, quantitative in 
situ electron, x-ray, and light microscopy)
Craig Hawker, Ph.D., University of Cambridge, Professor, Director of Materials 
Research Laboratory (synthetic polymer chemistry, nanotechnology, materials science) 
*5
Alan J. Heeger, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor, Director of Institute for Polymers 
and Organic Solids, 2000 Chemistry Nobel Laureate (condensed-matter physics, 
conducting polymers) *4
Jacob N. Israelachvili, Ph.D., University of Cambridge, Professor (adhesion, 
friction surface forces, colloids, biosurface interactions) 
*3
Carlos G. Levi, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Professor (materials 
processing, and microstructure evolution, coatings, composites, functional inorganics) 
*2
Robert M. McMeeking, Ph.D., Brown University, Professor (mechanics of materials, 
fracture mechanics, plasticity, computational mechanics, process modeling) 
*2
Shuji Nakamura, Ph.D., University of Tokushima, Cree Professor of Solid State 
Lighting and Displays (gallium nitride, blue lasers, white LEDs, solid state illumination, 
bulk GaN substrates)
G. Robert Odette, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (funda-
mental deformation and fracture, materials in extreme environments, structural reliability, 
and high-performance composites) *2
Chris Palmstrom, Ph.D., University of Leeds, Professor (atomic level control of interfacial 
phenomena, in-situ STM, surface and thin film analysis, metallization of semiconductors, 
dissimilar materials epitaxial growth, molecular beam and chemical beam epitaxial 
growth of metallic compounds) *1
Philip A. Pincus, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (theoretical aspects of self-
assembled biomolecular structures, membranes, polymers, and colloids)
 *4
Tresa M. Pollock, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (mechanical 
and environmental performance of materials in extreme environments, unique high 
temperature materials processing paths, ultrafast laser-material interactions, alloy 
design and 3-D materials characterization) 
Cyrus R. Safinya, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (biophysics, 
supramolecular assemblies of biological molecules, non-viral gene delivery systems)
Omar A. Saleh, Ph.D., Princeton University, Assistant Professor (single-molecule 
biophysics, motor proteins, DNA-protein interactions)
Rachel A. Segalman, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara, Professor 
(synthesis of macromolecules, self-assembly, electronic properties of molecular 
and macromolecular materials, transport processes in polymers)
Ram Seshadri, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Science, Professor (inorganic materials, 
preparation and magnetism of bulk solids and nonoparticles, patterned materials)
Hyongsok (Tom) Soh, Ph.D., Stanford, Associate Professor (directed evolution 
of biological molecules, supramolecular assemblies, integrated biosensors)
 *2
James S. Speck, Sc.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor (nitride 
semiconductors, III-V semiconductors, ferroelectric and high-K films, microstructural 
evolution, extended defects, transmission electron microscopy, x-ray diffraction)
Susanne Stemmer, Ph.D., University of Stuttgart, Professor (functional oxide thin 
films, structure-property relationships, scanning transmission electron microscopy 
and spectroscopy)
Galen Stucky, Ph.D., Iowa State University, Professor (biomaterials, composites, materials 
synthesis, electro-optical materials catalysis)*5
Anton Van der Ven, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Associate Professor 
(First principles prediction of thermodynamic, kinetic and and mechanical properties 
of alloys, ceramics and compound semiconductors, statistical mechanical 
methods development,electrochemcial energy storage materials, high temperature structural 
materials corrosion)
Stephen Wilson, Ph.D., University of Tennessee, Assistant Professor (Magnetism 
in complex oxides, phase behaviors in correlated electron systems and quantum 
materials, spin-orbit coupled materials, quantum criticality, neuron and x-ray 
scattering, bulk single crystal growth)
Chris Van de Walle, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor (novel electronic mater-
ials, wide-band-gap semiconductors, oxides)
Claude Weisbuch, Ph.D., Universite Paris VII, Ecole Polytechnique-Palaiseau, Professor 
(semiconductor physics: fundamental and applied optical studies of quantized electronic 
structures and photonic-controlled structures; electron spin resonance in semiconductors, 
optical semiconductor microcavities, photonic bandgap materials) 
Francis W. Zok, Ph.D., McMaster University, Professor (mechanical and thermal properties 
of materials and structures)
Emeriti Faculty
Anthony K. Cheetham, Ph.D., Oxford University, Professor Emeritus (catalysis, 
optical materials, X-ray, neutron diffraction) *5
----------------Page (39) Break----------------
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING • 39
David R. Clarke, Ph.D., University of Cambridge, Professor Emeritus (electrical 
ceramics, thermal barrier coatings, piezospectroscopy, mechanics of 
microelectronics) *2
Arthur C. Gossard, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor Emeritus (epitaxial growth, 
artificially synthesized semiconductor microstructures, semiconductor devices) 
*1
Evelyn Hu, Ph.D., Columbia University, Professor Emeritus (high-resolution 
fabrication techniques for semiconductor device structures, process-related materials 
damage, contact/interface studies, superconductivity) 
*1
Herbert Kroemer, Dr. Rer. Nat., University of Göttingen, Donald W. Whittier Professor 
of Electrical Engineering, 2000 Physics Nobel Laureate (device physics, molecular 
beam epitaxy, heterojunctions, compound semiconductors)
 *1   
Noel C. MacDonald, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Kavli Professor in MEMS Technology 
(microelectromechanical systems, applied physics, nano-fabrication, electron optics, 
materials, mechanics, surface analysis) *2
Frederick F. Milstein, Ph.D., UC Los Angeles, Professor Emeritus (crystal 
mechanics, bonding, defects, mechanical properties) 
*2
Pierre M. Petroff, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (semiconductor interfaces, 
defects physics, epitaxy of self assembled quantum structures, quantum dots and 
nanomagnets, spectroscopy of semiconductor nanostructures) 
*1
Fred Wudl, Ph.D., UC Los Angeles, Professor (optical and electro-optical properties of 
conjugated polymers, organic chemistry of fullerenes, and design and preparation of self-
mending polymers) 
*1 Joint appointment with Electrical & Computer Engineering*2 Joint appointment with Mechanical Engineering
*3 Joint appointment with Chemical Engineering*4 Joint appointment with Physics
*5 Joint appointment with Chemistry & Biochemistry
Affiliated Faculty
David Auston, Ph.D. (Electrical and Computer Engineering)
Glenn H. Fredrickson, Ph.D. (Chemical Engineering)
Mahn Won Kim, Ph.D. (Physics)
Gary Leal, Ph.D. (Chemical Engineering)
Gene Lucas, Ph.D. (Chemical Engineering)
 
The Department of Materials was con-
ceptualized and built under two basic 
guidelines: to educate graduate students 
in advanced materials and to introduce 
them to novel ways of doing research in a 
collaborative, multidisciplinary environment. 
Advancing materials technology today—ei-
ther by creating new materials or improving 
the properties of existing ones—requires 
a synthesis of expertise from the classic 
materials fields of metallurgy, ceramics, 
and polymer science, and such funda-
mental disciplines as applied mechanics, 
chemistry, biology, and solid-state phys-
ics. Since no individual has the necessary 
breadth and depth of knowledge in all 
these areas, solving advanced materials 
problems demands the integrated efforts 
of scientists and engineers with different 
backgrounds and skills in a research team. 
The department has effectively transferred 
the research team concept, which is the 
operating mode of the high technology 
industry, into an academic environment.
The department has major research 
groups working on a wide range of 
advanced inorganic and organic materi-
als, including advanced structural alloys, 
ceramics and polymers; high performance 
composites; thermal barrier coatings and 
engineered surfaces; organic, inorganic 
and hybrid semiconductor and photonic 
material systems; catalysts and porous 
materials, magnetic, ferroelectric and 
multiferroic materials; biomaterials and 
biosurfaces, including biomedically relevant 
systems; colloids, gels and other complex 
fluids; lasers, LEDs and optoelectronic 
devices; packaging systems; microscale 
engineered systems, including MEMS. The 
groups are typically multidisciplinary involv-
ing faculty, postdoctoral researchers and 
graduate students working on the synthesis 
and processing, structural characterization, 
property evaluation, microstructure-proper-
ty relationships and mathematical models 
relating micromechanisms to macroscopic 
behavior.
Materials Courses
UPPER DIVISION
100A. Structure and Properties I(3) STAFF
Prerequisites: Chemistry 1A-B; Physics 4; and, Mathematics 4B, 6A-B. Lecture, 3 hours.
An introduction to materials in modern technology. The internal structure of materials 
and its underlying principles: bonding, spatial organization of atoms and molecules, structural 
defects. Electrical, magnetic and optical properties of materials, and their relationship with structure.
100B. Structure and Properties II(3)  STAFF
Prerequisite: Materials 100A.Students who take Matrl 101 & 100B will only 
recieve mjor credit for one of these courses. Lecture, 3 hours.
Mechanical properties of engineering materials and their relationship to bonding and structure. 
Elastic, flow, and fracture behavior; time dependent deformation and failure. Stiffening, strengthening, 
and toughening mechanisms. Piezoelectricity, magnetostriction and thermo-mechanical interactions 
in materials.
100C. Fundamentals of Structural Evolution(3)  STAFF
Prerequisite: Materials 100A and Materials 100B.An introduction to the thermodynamic and 
kinetic principles governing structural evolution in materials. Phase equilibria, diffusion and structural 
transformations. Metastable structures in materials. Self-assembling systems. Structural control through 
processing and/or imposed fields. Environmental effects on structure and properties.
101. Introduction to the Structure and Properties of Materials
(3) STAFFPrerequisite: upper-division standing.
Students who take MATRL 101 & 100B will only receive major credit for one of these courses. 
Students interested in following the BS Engineering/
MS Materials program should not take this course.Introduction to the structure of engineering 
materials and its relationship with their mechanical properties. Structure of solids and defects. Concepts 
of microstructure and origins. Elastic, plastic flow and fracture properties. Mechanisms of deformation 
and failure. Stiffening, strengthening, and toughening mechanisms.
135. Biophysics and Biomolecular Materials(3) SAFINYA
Prerequisites: Physics 5 or 6C or 25.Same course as Physics 135.
Structure and function of cellular molecules (lipids, nucleic acids, proteins, and carbohydrates). 
Genetic engineering techniques of molecular biology. Biomolecular materials and biomedical applications 
(e.g., bio-sensors, drug delivery systems, gene carrier systems).
160. Introduction to Polymer Science(3)  STAFF
Prerequisite: Chemistry 109A-B.Same course as Chemical Engineering 160.
Introductory course covering synthesis, characterization, structure, and mechanical 
properties of polymers. The course is taught from a materials perspective and includes polymer 
thermodynamics, chain architecture, measurement and control of molecular weight as well as 
crystallization and glass transitions. 
162A. The Quantum Description of Electronic Materials
(4) STAFFPrerequisites: ECE 130A-B and 134 with a minimum 
grade of C- in all; open to EE and Materials majors only.
Same course as ECE 162A.Electrons as particles and waves, Schrodinger’s 
equation and illustrative solutions. Tunneling. Atomic structure, the Exclusion Principle and the periodic 
table. Bonds. Free electrons in metals. Periodic potentials and energy bands. (F)
162B. Fundamentals of the Solid State(4)  STAFF
Prerequisites: ECE 162A with a minimum grade of C-; open to EE and materials majors only.
Same course as ECE 162B.Crystal lattices and the structure of solids, with 
emphasis on semiconductors. Lattice vibrations, electronic states and energy bands. Electrical and 
thermal conduction. Dielectric and optical properties. Semiconductor devices: Diffusion, P-N junctions and 
diode behavior.
185. Materials in Engineering(3)  STAFF
Prerequisite: Materials 100B or 101. Same course as ME 185. Lecture, 3 hours.
Introduces the student to the main families of materials and the principles behind their 
development, selection, and behavior. Discusses the generic properties of metals, ceramics, polymers, 
and composites more relevant to structural applications. The relationship of properties to 
structure and processing is emphasized in every case.
186. Manufacturing and Materials(3) LEVI
Prerequisites: ME 15 and 151C; and, Materials 100B or 101.
Same course as ME 186. Lecture, 3 hours.Introduction to the fundamentals of common 
manufacturing processes and their interplay with the structure and properties of materials as they are 
transformed into products. Emphasis on process understanding and the key physical concepts and 
basic mathematical relationships involved in each of the processes discussed.
188. Topics in Materials
(2) VANDEWALLE Topics in Materials for renewable energy-efficient 
applications: Thermoelectrics, Solid State Lighting, Solar Cells, High Temperature coatings for turbines 
and engines. (W)
----------------Page (40) Break----------------
40 • MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
GRADUATE COURSES
Graduate courses for this major can be found in the UCSB General Catalog.
Mechanical 
Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering,  Engineering II, Room 2355;  
Telephone (805) 893-2430
Web site: www.me.ucsb.edu
Chair: Francesco Bullo Vice Chair: Frederic Gibou
Faculty
Bassam Bamieh, Ph.D., Rice University, Professor (control systems design with 
applications to fluid flow problems)
Matthew R. Begley, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara, Professor 
(mechanics of materials with applications to multilayered devices such as microfluidics, 
MEMS and protective coatings) 
Glenn E. Beltz, Ph.D., Harvard, Professor (solid mechanics, materials, aeronautics, 
engineering education)
Ted D. Bennett, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Associate Professor (thermal science, laser 
processing)
David Bothman, B.S., UC San Diego, Lecturer
Francesco Bullo, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Professor (motion planning and 
coordination, control systems, distributed and adaptive algorithms)
Otger Campas, Ph.D., Curie Institute (Paris) and University of Barcelona, Assistant 
Professor (physical biology, systems biology, quantitative biology, morphogenesis and self-
organization of living matter)
Frederic Gibou, Ph.D., University of California, Los Angeles, Professor 
(computational science and engineering) *2
Stephen Laguette, M.S., University of California, Los Angeles, Lecturer (biomedical 
engineering design)
Carlos Levi, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Professor (conceptual 
design, synthesis and evolution in service of structural and inorganic materials, especially 
for high temperature applications) *3
Paolo Luzzato-Fegiz, PhD, Cornell University, Assistant Professor (fluid 
mechanics, wind energy and instrument development)
Eric F. Matthys, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Professor (heat transfer, fluid 
mechanics, rheology)
Robert M. McMeeking, Ph.D., Brown University, Professor (mechanics of materials, 
fracture mechanics, plasticity, computational mechanics) 
*3
Eckart Meiburg, Ph.D., University of Karlsruhe, Professor (computational fluid 
dynamics, fluid mechanics)
Carl D. Meinhart, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Professor (wall 
turbulence, microfluidics, flows in complex geometries)
Igor Mezic, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Professor (applied mechanics, 
non-linear dynamics, fluid mechanics, applied mathematics)
Jeffrey M. Moehlis, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, Professor (nonlinear 
dynamics, fluid mechanics, biological dynamics, applied mathematics)
Bradley E. Paden, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (control theory, kinematics, robotics)
Sumita Pennathur, Ph.D., Stanford University, Associate Professor (application 
of microfabrication techniques and micro/nanoscale flow phenomena)
Linda R. Petzold, Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Professor, Director 
of Computational Science and Engineering Graduate Emphasis (computational science 
and engineering; systems biology) *2
Hyongsok Tom Soh, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor (micro-
electromechanical systems, integrated biosensors, multi-functional biomaterials)
Tyler G. Susko, Lecturer Potential SOE
Kimberly L. Turner, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor (microelectromechanical systems, 
dynamics, solid mechanics, measurement and characterization of microsystems motion and 
device parameters)
Megan Valentine, Ph.D., Harvard University, Assistant Professor (single-molecule 
biophysics, cell mechanics, motor proteins, biomaterials)
Henry T. Yang, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor (aerospace structures, structural 
dynamics and stability, transonic flutter and aeroelasticity, intelligent manufacturing 
systems)
Emeriti Faculty
Sanjoy Banerjee, PhD, University of Waterloo Joint Appointment: CNENG
John C. Bruch, Jr., Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor Emeritus (applied 
mathematics, numerical solutions and analysis)
David R. Clarke, Ph.D., University of Cambridge, Professor (electrical ceramics, 
thermal barrier coatings, piezospectroscopy, mechanics of microelectronics)
 *3 
Roy S. Hickman, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor Emeritus (fluid mechanics, physical 
gas dynamics, computer-aided design)
George Homsy, Ph.D., University of Illinois, Professor Emeritus (hydrodynamic stability, 
thermal convection, thin film hydrodynamics, flow in microgeometries and in porous media, 
polymer fluid mechanics)
Keith T. Kedward, Ph.D., University of Wales, Professor (design of composite systems)
Wilbert J. Lick, Ph.D., Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Professor Emeritus 
(oceanography and limnology, applied mathematics)
Gene Lucas, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Professor (mechanical 
properties of structural materials, environmental effects, structural reliability)
Noel C. MacDonald, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Kavli Professor in MEMS Technology 
(microelectromechanical systems, applied physics, materials, mechanics, 
nanofabrication) *3
Ekkehard P. Marschall, Dr. Ing., Technische Hochschule Hannover, Professor Emeritus 
(thermodynamics, heat and mass transfer, desalination, energy conversion, experimental 
techniques)
Stephen R. McLean, Ph.D., University of Washington, Professor Emeritus (fluid 
mechanics, physical oceanography, sediment transport) 
Frederick Milstein, Ph.D., UC Los Angeles, Professor Emeritus (mechanical properties of 
materials) *3
Thomas P. Mitchell, Ph.D., California Institute of Technology, Professor Emeritus 
(theoretical and applied mechanics)
George R. Odette, PhD, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Joint Appointment: 
MATRL
Theofanis G. Theofanous, Ph.D., University of Minnesota, Professor, Director of Center 
for Risk Studies and Safety (nuclear and chemical plant safety, multiphase flow, 
thermal hydraulics) *1
Marshall Tulin, M.S., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor Emeritus, 
Ocean Engineering Laboratory Director (hydrodynamics, aerodynamics, turbulence, 
cavitation phenomena, drag reduction in turbulent flows)
Walter W. Yuen, Ph.D., UC Berkeley, Professor (thermal science, radiation heat 
transfer, heat transfer with phase change, combustion)
*1 Joint appointment with Chemical Engineering*2 Joint appointment with Computer Science
*3 Joint appointment with Materials
Affiliated Faculty
Paul J. Atzberger (Mathematics) Katie A. Byl (Electrical and Computer 
Engineering)Hector D. Ceniceros, PhD (Mathematics)
Tommy D. Dickey, PhD (Geography)Joao P. Hespanha, PhD (Electrical and 
Computer Engineering)Patricia Holden (Bren School of              
Environmental Science and Management)Arturo Keller (Bren School of Environmental 
Science and Management)L. Gary Leal (Chemical Engineering)
Kevin W. Plaxco, PhD (Chemistry and Biochemistry, Biomolecular Science and 
Engineering Program)Libe Washburn, PhD (Geography)
The undergraduate program in mechanical 
engineering is accredited by the Engineer-
ing Accreditation Commission of ABET, 
http://www.abet.org. We offer a balanced 
curriculum of theory and application, involv-
ing: preparation in basic science, math, 
computing and writing; a comprehensive 
set of engineering science and labora-
tory courses; and a series of engineering 
----------------Page (41) Break----------------
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING • 41
design courses starting in the freshman 
year and concluding with a three course 
sequence in the senior year. Our students 
gain hands-on expertise with state-of-the 
art tools of computational design, analysis, 
and manufacturing that are increasingly 
used in industry, government, and academ-
ic institutions. In addition, the Department 
has a 15-unit elective program that allows 
students to gain depth in specific areas 
of interest, while maintaining appropriate 
breadth in the basic stem areas of the dis-
cipline. All students participate in a widely 
recognized design project program which 
includes projects sponsored by industry, 
UCSB researchers, as well as intercol-
legiate design competitions. The project 
program has been expanded to emphasize 
entrepreneurial product-oriented projects.
Mission Statement
We offer an education that prepares our 
students to become leaders of the engi-
neering profession and one which empow-
ers them to engage in a lifetime of learning 
and achievement.
Educational Objectives for the 
Undergraduate Program
It is the objective of the Mechanical En-
gineering Program to produce graduates 
who:
1.  Successfully practice in either the 
traditional or the emerging technologies 
comprising mechanical engineering;
2. Are successful in a range of engineering 
graduate programs; 
3.  Have a solid background in the funda-
mentals of engineering allowing them to 
pass the Fundamentals of Engineering 
examination;
4.  Engage in life-long learning opportuni-
ties such as professional workshops 
and activity in professional societies.
In order to achieve these objectives, the 
Department of Mechanical Engineering is 
engaged in a very ambitious effort to lead 
the discipline in new directions that will 
be critical to the success of 21st century 
technologies. While maintaining strong ties 
to STEM areas of the discipline, we are 
developing completely new cross-cutting 
fields of science and engineering related to 
topics such as: microscale engineering and 
microelectrical-micromechanical systems; 
dynamics and controls and related areas 
of sensors, actuators and instrumentation; 
advanced composite materials and smart 
structures; computation, simulation and 
information science; advanced energy and 
transportation systems; and environmental 
monitoring, modeling and remediation. 
Student Outcomes
Upon graduation, students in the mechani-
cal engineering B.S. degree program:
1. Should possess a solid foundation in, 
and be able to apply the principles of, 
mathematics, science, and engineering 
to solve problems and have the ability 
to learn new skills relevant to his/her 
chosen career.
2. Have the ability to conduct and analyze 
data from experiments in dynamics, fluid 
dynamics, thermal science and materi-
als, and should have been exposed to 
experimental design in at least one of 
these areas.
3. Should have experienced the use of 
current software in problem solving and 
design.
4.  Should demonstrate the ability to 
design useful products, systems, and 
processes.
5. Should be able to work effectively on 
teams.
6. Should have an understanding of pro-
fessional and ethical responsibilities.
7. Should be able to write lab reports and 
design reports and give effective oral 
presentations.
8. Should have the broad background in 
the humanities and the social sci-
ences, which provides an awareness of 
contemporary issues and facilitates an 
understanding of the global and societal 
impact of engineering problems and 
solutions.
9. Be a members of or participate in a 
professional society.
Undergraduate Program
Bachelor of Science— 
Mechanical Engineering
A minimum of 190 units is required for 
graduation. A complete list of requirements 
for the major can be found on page 54. 
Schedules should be planned to meet both 
General Education and major require-
ments.
Students who are not Mechanical 
Engineering majors may be permitted to 
take lower division mechanical engineering 
courses, subject to meeting prerequisites 
and grade-point average requirements, 
availability of space, and consent of the 
instructor.
The mechanical engineering elective 
courses  allow students to acquire more 
in-depth knowledge in one of several areas 
of specialization, such as those related to: 
the environment; design and manufactur-
ing; thermal and fluid sciences; structures, 
mechanics, and materials; and dynamics 
and controls. A student’s specific elective 
course selection is subject to the approval 
of the department advisor.
Courses required for the pre-major or 
major, inside or outside of the Department 
of Mechanical Engineering, cannot be 
taken for the passed/not passed grad-
ing option. They must be taken for letter 
grades.
Research Opportunities
Upper-division undergraduates have oppor-
tunities to work in a research environment 
with faculty members who are conducting 
current research in the various fields of 
mechanical engineering. Students inter-
ested in pursuing undergraduate research 
projects should contact individual faculty 
members in the department.
Mechanical 
Engineering Courses
LOWER DIVISION
6. Basic Electrical and Electronic Circuits(4) STAFF
Prerequisites: Physics 3-3L; Mathematics 3C or 4A; open to ME majors only. 
Not open for credit to students who have completed ECE 2A or 2B, or ECE 6A or 6B.
Introduction to basic electrical circuits and electronics. Includes Kirchhoff’s laws, phasor 
analysis, circuit elements, operational amplifiers, and transistor circuits.
10. Engineering Graphics: Sketching, CAD, and Conceptual Design
(4) STAFFPrerequisite: ME majors only. 
Introduction to engineering graphics, CAD, and freehand sketching. Develop CAD proficiency using 
advanced 3-D software. Graphical presentation of design: views, sections, dimensioning, and 
tolerancing.
11. Introductory Concepts in Mechanical Engineering
(1) BOTHMAN, FIELDS, BELTZPrerequisite: lower-division standing. 
The theme question of this course is “What do mechanical engineers do?” Survey of mechanical 
and environmental engineering applications. Lectures by mechanical engineering faculty and practicing 
engineers.
12. Manufacturing Processes(1) BOTHMAN
Prerequisite: ME majors only.Processes used to convert raw material into 
finished objects. Overview of manufacturing processes including: casting, forging, machining, 
presswork, plastic and composite processing. Videos, demonstrations, and tours illustrate modern industrial 
practice. Selection of appropriate processes.
12S. Introduction to Machine Shop(1) STAFF
Prerequisite: ME majors only. Not open for credit to students who have 
completed Mechanical Engineering 156S.Basic machine shop skills course. Students 
learn to work safely in a machine shop. Students are introduced to the use of hand tools, the lathe, 
the milling machine, drill press, saws, and precision measuring tools. Students apply these skills by 
completing a project.
14. Statics(4) BELTZ, SHUGAR, TURNER
Prerequisite: Math 3B, or AP Calculus AB with a score of 5, or AP Calculus BC with a score of 3 or better; 
and Physics 1Introduction to applied mechanics. Forces, 
moments, couples, and resultants; vector algebra; construction of free body diagrams; equilibrium in 
2- and 3- dimensions; analysis of frames, machines, trusses and beams; distributed forces; friction.
15. Strength of Materials(4) BELTZ, KEDWARD
Prerequisites: ME 14 with a minimum grade of C-; open to mechanical engineering majors only.
Properties of structural materials, including Hooke’s law and behavior beyond the elastic limit. 
Concepts of stress, strain, displacement, force, force systems, and multiaxial stress states. Design 
applications to engineering structures, including problems of bars in tension, compression, and torsion, 
beams subject to flexure, pressure vessels, and buckling. 
16. Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics(4) TURNER, MEZIC, BAMIEH
Prerequisites: Physics 2; ME 14 with a minimum grade of C-; and, Mathematics 5C or 6B; (may be 
----------------Page (42) Break----------------
42 • MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
taken concurrently); open to ME majors only.Vectorial kinematics of particles in space, 
orthogonal coordination systems. Relative and constrained motions of particles. Dynamics of 
particles and systems of particles, equations of motion, energy and momentum methods. Collisions. 
Planar kinematics and kinetics of rigid bodies. Energy and momentum methods for analyzing rigid 
body systems. Moving frames and relative motion. 
17. Mathematics of Engineering(3) MOEHLIS, GIBOU
Prerequisite: Engineering 3; Mathematics 5B or 6A (may be taken concurrently); open to ME majors 
only.Introduction to basic numerical and analytical 
methods, with implementation using MATLAB. Topics include root finding, linear algebraic 
equations, introduction to matrix algebra, determinants, inverses and eigenvalues, curve fitting 
and interpolation, and numerical differentiation and integration. (S, M)
95. Introduction to Mechanical Engineering(1-4) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.May be repeated for credit to a maximum of 6 
units.Participation in projects in the laboratory or 
machine shop. Projects may be student- or faculty-originated depending upon student interest and 
consent of faculty member. 
97. Mechanical Engineering Design Projects(1-4) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.May be repeated for maximum of 12 units, 
variable hours.Course offers students opportunity to work 
on established departmental design projects. P/NP grading, does not satisfy technical elective 
requirement.
99. Introduction to Research(1-3) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.May be repeated for maximum of 6 units, 
Students are limited to 5 units per quarter and 30 units total in all 98/99/198/199/199AA-ZZ courses 
combined.Directed study to be arranged with individual 
faculty members. Course offers exceptional students an opportunity to participate in a research group.
UPPER DIVISION
100. Professional Seminar(1) STAFF
Prerequisite: undergraduate standing. May be repeated for up to 3 units. May not be 
used as a departmental elective.A series of weekly lectures given by university 
staff and outside experts in all fields of mechanical and environmental engineering.
104. Mechatronics(3) BAMIEH, PADEN
Prerequisites: ME 6; open to ME majors only.Interfacing of mechanical and electrical systems 
and mechatronics. Basic introduction to sensors, actuators, and computer interfacing and control. 
Transducers and measurement devices, actuators, A/D and D/A conversion, signal conditioning and 
filtering. Practical skills developed in weekly lab exercises.
105. Mechanical Engineering Laboratory(4) BENNETT, MATTHYS, VALENTINE
Prerequisite: ME 151B, 152B, 163; and, Materials 101 or 100B.
Introduction to fundamental engineering laboratory measurement techniques and report 
writing skills. Experiments from thermosciences, fluid mechanics, mechanics, materials science and 
environmental engineering. Introduction to modern data acquisition and analysis techniques. (S)
106A. Advanced Mechanical Engineering Laboratory
(3) BAMIEHPrerequisite: ME 155A.
An advanced lab course with experiments in dynamical systems and feedback control design. 
Students design, troubleshoot, and perform detailed, multi-session experiments.
110. Aerodynamics and Aeronautical Engineering
(3) BELTZ, MEINHARTPrerequisites: ME 14 and 152A.
Concepts from aerodynamics, including lift and drag analysis for airfoils as well as aircraft sizing/
scaling issues. Structural mechanics concepts are applied to practical aircraft design. Intended 
for students considering a career in aeronautical engineering.
112. Energy 
(3) MATTHYSPrerequisite: Senior Undergraduate or Graduate 
Student status in the College of Engineering; or consent of Instructor.
Introduction to the field of Energetics. Topics may include energy sources and production, energy 
usage, renewable technologies, hardware, operating principles, environmental impact, energy reserves, 
national and global energy budgets, historical perspectives, economics, societal considerations, 
and others. 
124. Advanced Topics in Transport Phenomena/Safety
(3) STAFFPrerequisites: Chemical Engineering 120A-B-C, or  
ME 151A-B and ME 152A.Same course as Chemical Engineering 124.
Hazard identification and assessments, runaway reactions, emergency relief. Plant accidents and 
safety issues. Dispersion and consequences of releases.
125AA-ZZ. Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering
(3) STAFFPrerequisite: Consent of instructor.
May be repeated for credit to a maximum of 12 units provided letter designations are different. 
Students are advised to consult their faculty advisor before making their course selection.
Individual courses each concentrating on one area in the following subjects: applied mechanics, 
cad/cam, controls, design, environmental engineering, fluid mechanics, materials science, 
mechanics of solids and structures, ocean and coastal engineering, robotics, theoretical mechanics, 
thermal sciences, and recent developments in mechanical engineering. 
128. Design of Biomedical Devices(3) LAGUETTE
Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 10, 14, 15, 16, and 153; open to ME majors only.
Introductory course addresses the challenges of biomedical device design, prototyping and testing, 
material considerations, regulatory requirements, design control, human factors and ethics.
134. Advanced Thermal Science(3) MATTHYS, YUEN
Prerequisite: ME 151C.This class will address advanced topics in fluid 
mechanics, heat transfer, and thermodynamics. Topics of interest may include combustion, phase 
change, experimental techniques, materials processing, manufacturing, engines, HVAC, non-
Newtonian fluids, etc.
140A. Numerical Analysis in Engineering(3) MOEHLIS, GIBOU, MEIBURG
Prerequisites: ME 17 with a minimum grade of C- or Chemical Engineering 132A; open to ME and 
Chemical Engineering majors only. Numerical analysis and analytical solutions 
of problems described by linear and nonlinear differential equations with an emphasis on MATLAB. 
First and second order differential equations; systems of differential equations; linear algebraic 
equations, matrices and eigenvalues; boundary value problems; finite differences. (F)
140B. Theoretical Analysis in Mechanical Engineering
(3) MOEHLIS, GIBOU, MEIBURGPrerequisites: ME 140A
Analysis of engineering problems formulated in terms of partial differential equations. Solutions of 
these mathematical models by means of analytical and numerical methods. Physical interpretation of 
the results.
141A. Introduction to Nanoelectromechanical and Microelectromechanical systems (NEMS/
MEMS)(3) TURNER, PENNATHUR
Prerequisites: ME 16 & 17; ME 152A & ME 151A (may be concurrent); or ECE 130A & 137A with a 
minimum grade of C- in both..Introduction to nano- and microtechnology. 
Scaling laws and nanoscale physics are stressed. Individual subjects at the nanoscale including 
materials, mechanics, photonics, electronics, and fluidics will be described, with an emphasis on 
differences of behavior at the nanoscale and real-world examples.
141B. MEMS: Processing and DeviceCharacterization
(4) TURNER, PENNATHURPrerequisites: ME 141A, ME 163 (may be 
concurrent); or ECE 141A.Same course as ECE 141B.
Lectures and laboratory on semiconductor-based processing for MEMS. Description of key equipment 
and characterization tools used for MEMS and design, fabrication, characterization and testing 
of MEMS. Emphasis on current MEMS devices including accelerometers, comb drives, micro-
reactors and capacitor-actuators.(W)
146. Molecular and Cellular Biomechanics
(3) VALENTINECourse introduces fundamental concepts 
in molecular and cellular biomechanics. Will consider the role of physical, thermal and chemical 
forces, examine their influence on cell strength and elasticity, and explore the properties of 
enzymatically-active materials. (F)
147. Mechatronics Using Labview(3) HARE
Prerequisite: Engineering 3; and Mechanical Engineering 6
     Not open for additional credit to students who have completed ME 125CH.
     Introduction to mechatronics, electromechanical systems, data acquisition, software programming 
and Labview. Students learn programming fundamentals, hardware interfacing and controls with 
simulated hardware and actual motor controllers. Students compete to control a motor system 
through a variety of control problems. Final projects automate working hardware in research labs.
151A. Thermosciences 1(4) BENNETT, MEINHART
Prerequisite: Physics 2; ME 14 with a minimum grade of C-; and, Mathematics 5C.
Basic concepts in thermodynamics, system analysis, energy, thermodynamic laws, and cycles. 
(F)
151B. Thermosciences 2(4) BENNETT
Prerequisite: ME 151A and 152A.Introduction to heat transfer processes, steady 
and unsteady state conduction, multidimensional analysis. Introduction to convective heat transfer. 
(W)
151C. Thermosciences 3(3) BENNETT
Prerequisites: ME 151B and 152B; open to ME majors only.
Convective heat transfer, external and internal flow, forced and free convection, phase change, heat 
exchangers. Introduction to radiative heat transfer.
152A. Fluid Mechanics(4) KRETCHETNIKOV, MEINHART
Prerequisite: Mathematics 5C; and ME 16 with a minimum grade of C-.
----------------Page (43) Break----------------
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING • 43
Introduction to the fundamental concepts in fluid mechanics and basic fluid properties. Basic 
equations of fluid flow. Dimensional analysis and similitude. Hydrodynamics. (F)
152B. Fluid Mechanics(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: ME 152A; open to ME majors only. Incompressible viscous flow. Boundary-layer 
theory. Introductory considerations for one-dimensional compressible flow. 
153. Introduction to Mechanical Engineering Design
(3) BELTZ, TURNERPrerequisites: ME 10 and 16; open to ME majors 
only. Design of systems using mechanics, stress 
analysis and finite elements. Statistical problems in manufacturing and reliability. Ethics. One paper 
design project plus the ASME student design project. 
154. Design and Analysis of Structures(3) STAFF
Prerequisites: ME 15 and 16 with minimum grades of C-; open to ME majors only.
Introductory course in structural analysis and design. The theories of matrix structural analysis 
and finite element analysis for the solution of analytical and design problems in structures are 
emphasized. Lecture material includes structural theory compatibility method, slope deflection 
method, displacement method and virtual work. Topics include applications to bars, beams, trusses, 
frames, and solids.
155A. Control System Design(3) BAMIEH, BULLO
Prerequisite: ME 17 with a minimum grade of C-; ME 140A; and ME 163.
The discipline of control and its application. Dynamics and feedback. The mathematical models: 
transfer functions and state space descriptions. Simple control design (PID). Assessment of a control 
problem, specification, fundamental limitations, codesign of system and control.
155B. Control System Design(3) PADEN
Prerequisite: ME 155A.Dynamic system modeling using state-space 
methods, controllability and observability, state-space methods for control design including pole 
placement, and linear quadratic regulator methods. Observers and observer-based feedback controllers. 
Sampled-data and digital control. Laboratory exercises using MATLAB for simulation and control 
design. 
156A. Mechanical Engineering Design - I(3) TURNER, MCMEEKING, BEGLEY
Prerequisite: ME 14, with a minimum grade of C-; and ME 15, with a minimum grade of C-; and MATRL 
101 (or MATRL 100B); or consent of instructor. Open to ME majors only
The rational selection of engineering materials, and the utilization of Ashby- charts, stress, strain, 
strength, and fatigue failure consideration as applied to the design of machine elements. Lectures also 
support the development of system design concepts using assigned projects and involves the preparation 
of engineering reports and drawings. 
156B. Mechanical Engineering Design II(3) STAFF
Prerequisites: ME 156A; open to ME majors only. Machine elements including gears, bearings, 
and shafts. Joint design and analysis: bolts, rivets, adhesive bonding and welding. Machine dynamics 
and fatigue. Design for reliability and safety. Codes and standards. Topics covered are applied in 
practical design projects.
157. Introduction to Multiphysics Simulation
(3) MEINHARTPrerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 151A-B; and 
Mechanical Engineering 152A-B; and Mechanical Engineering 140A
     May not be taken for additional credit by students who have completed ME 125CM. May not be taken 
by students who have completed ME 225CM or ME 
257.     Introduces students to the concepts of 
multiphysics simulation. Students are introduced to PDE’s, associated analytical solutions, and the 
finite elements method. Multiphysics problems are solved in multiple domains, and with fluid/structure 
interactions. Each student conducts a project where multiphysics tools are used to explore details of 
multiphysical processes.
158. Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing
(3) STAFFPrerequisites: ME 10 and 156A; open to ME majors 
only.Emphasis on programming, operation and design 
of automated manufacturing tools. Students learn to program CNC tools to make parts with G&M Code 
and Mastercam CAM software. Students make parts in hands-on labs using CNC tools, 3D printers and 
laser cutters. Select topics in automated tool design and construction.
162. Introduction to Elasticity(3) MCMEEKING, BELTZ
Prerequisites: ME 15 and 140A. Equations of equilibrium, compatibility, and 
boundary conditions. Solutions of two-dimensional problems in rectangular and polar coordinates. 
Eigen-solutions for the Wedge and Williams’ solution for cracks. Stress intensity factors. Extension, 
torsion, and bending. Energy theorems. Introduction to wave propagation in elastic solids.
163. Engineering Mechanics: Vibrations(3) MEZIC, MCMEEKING
Prerequisites: ME 16 with a minimum grade of C-; open to ME majors only. 
Not open for credit to students who have completed ME 163B.
Topics relating to vibration in mechanical systems; exact and approximate methods of 
analysis, matrix methods, generalized coordinates and Lagrange’s equations, applications to systems. 
Basic feedback systems and controlled dynamic behavior. 
166. Advanced Strength of Materials(3) TURNER, KEDWARD
Prerequisite: ME 15. Analysis of statically determinate and 
indeterminate systems using integration, area moment, and energy methods. Beams on elastic 
foundations, curved beams, stress concentrations, fatigue, and theories of failure for ductile and brittle 
materials. Photoelasticity and other experimental techniques are covered, as well as methods of 
interpreting in-service failures. 
167. Structural Analysis(3) STAFF
Prerequisites: ME 15 or 165; and ME 140A. Presents introductory matrix methods for 
analysis of structures. Topics include review of matrix algebra and linear equations, basic structural 
theorems including the principle of superposition and energy theorems, truss bar, beam and plane frame 
elements, and programming techniques to realize these concepts.
169. Nonlinear Phenomena(4) STAFF
Prerequisites: Physics 105A or ME 163; or upper-division standing in ECE. 
Same course as ECE 183 and Physics 106. Not open for credit to students who have completed ME 
163C.An introduction to nonlinear phenomena. Flows 
and bifurcation in one and two dimensions, chaos, fractals, strange attractors. Applications to physics, 
engineering, chemistry, and biology. 
179D. Introduction to Robotics: Dynamics and Control
(4) BYLPrerequisites: ECE 130A or ME 155A (may be taken 
concurrently).Dynamic modeling and control methods for 
robotic systems. LaGrangian method for deriving equations of motion, introduction to the Jacobian, 
and modeling and control of forces and contact 
dynamics at a robotic end effector. Laboratories encourage a problem-solving approach to control. 
179L. Introduction to Robotics: Design Laboratory
(4) PADENPrerequisites: ENGR 3; and ME 6 or ECE 2A. Not 
open for credit to student who have completed Mechanical Engineering 170C or ECE 181C.
Design, programming, and testing of mobile robots. Design problems re formulated in 
terms of robot performance. Students solve electromechanical problems, developing skills in 
brainstorming, concept selection, spatial reasoning, teamwork and communication. Robots are controlled 
with micro-controllers using C programming interfaced to senors and motors.
179P. Introduction to Robotics: Planning and Kinematics
(4) BULLOPrerequisites: Engr 3; and either ME 17 or ECE 
130C (may be taken concurrently). Not open for credit to students who have completed ME 170A or 
ECE 181A.Same course as ECE 179P
Motion planning and kinematics topics with an emphasis on geometric reasoning, programming and 
matrix computations. Motion planning: configuration spaces, sensor-based planning, decomposition 
and sampling methods, and advanced planning algorithms. Kinematics: reference frames, rotations 
and displacements, kinematic motion models. 
185. Materials in Engineering(3) LEVI, ODETTE
Prerequisite: Materials 100B or 101.Same course as Materials 185.
Introduces the student to the main families of materials and the principles behind their 
development, selection, and behavior. Discusses the generic properties of metals, ceramics, polymers, 
and composites more relevant to structural applications. The relationship of properties to 
structure and processing is emphasized in every case.
186. Manufacturing and Materials(3) LEVI
Prerequisites: ME 15 and 151C; and, Materials 100B or 101.
Same course as Materials 186.Introduction to the fundamentals of common 
manufacturing processes and their interplay with the structure and properties of materials as they are 
transformed into products. Emphasis on process understanding and the key physical concepts and 
basic mathematical relationships involved in each of the processes discussed.
189A. Capstone Mechanical Engineering Design Project 
(2) STAFF Prerequisite: ME 105, ME 151C, ME 152B, ME 
153, and ME 163; or consent of instructor. Open to ME majors only.
Designed for majors. Concurrently offered with ME 156A. Quarters usually offered: Fall. A 3-quarter 
sequence with grades issued for each quarter. Students may not concurrently enroll in ME 197 and 
ME 189A-B-C with the same design project.Course can only be repeated as a full sequence 
(189A-B-C).Students work in teams under the direction 
of a faculty advisor (and possibly an industrial sponsor) to tackle an engineering design project. 
Engineering communication, such as reports and oral presentations are covered. Emphasis on 
practical, hands-on experience, and the integration of analytical and design skills acquired in the 
companion ME 156 courses.
189B. Capstone Mechanical Engineering Design Project 
(2) LAGUETTE Prerequisite: ME 189A
Designed for majors. Concurrently offered with ME 156B. Quarters usually offered: Winter. 
A 3-quarter sequence with grades issued for each quarter. Students may not concurrently enroll in ME 
----------------Page (44) Break----------------
44 • TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
197 and ME 189A-B-C with the same design project.Course can only be repeated as a full sequence 
(189A-B-C).Students work in teams under the direction 
of a faculty advisor (and possibly an industrial sponsor) to tackle an engineering design project. 
Engineering communication, such as reports and oral presentations, are covered. Course 
emphasizes practical, hands-on experience, and integrates analytical and design skills acquired in the 
companion ME 156 courses. (W)
189C. Capstone Mechanical Engineering Design Project 
(2) LAGUETTE Prerequisite: ME 189A,B
Designed for majors. Quarters usually offered: Spring. A 3-quarter sequence with grades issued 
for each quarter. Students may not concurrently enroll in ME 197 and ME 189A-B-C with the same 
design project. Course can only be repeated as a full sequence (189A-B-C).
Students work in teams under the direction of a faculty advisor (and possibly an industrial 
sponsor) to tackle an engineering design project. Engineering communication, such as reports 
and oral presentations, are covered. Course emphasizes practical, hands-on experience, and 
integrates analytical and design skills acquired in the companion ME 156 courses.
193. Internship in Industry(1) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor and prior departmental approval needed. 
Cannot be used as a departmental elective. May be repeated to a maximum of 2 units. 
Students obtain credit for a mechanical engineering related internship and/or industrial 
experience under faculty supervision. A 6-10 page written report is required for credit.  
197. Independent Projects in Mechanical Engineering Design
(1-4) STAFFPrerequisites: ME 16; consent of instructor.
May be repeated for a maximum of 12 units, variable hours. No more than 4 units may be used 
as departmental electives.Special projects in design engineering. Course 
offers motivated students opportunity to synthesize academic skills by designing and building new 
machines. 
199. Independent Studies in Mechanical Engineering
(1-5) STAFFPrerequisites: consent of instructor; upper-division 
standing; completion of two upper-division courses in Mechanical Engineering. 
Students must have a minimum of 3.0 grade-point average for the preceding three quarters and 
are limited to 5 units per quarter and 30 units total in all 98/99/198/199/199DC/199RA courses combined. 
No more than 4 units may be used as departmental electives. May be repeated to 12 units. 
Directed individual study.
GRADUATE COURSES
Graduate courses for this major can be found in the UCSB General Catalog.
Technology 
Management
Technology Management Program       Phelps Hall, Room 1332 
Telephone (805) 893-5133                        Web site: www.tmp.ucsb.edu
Chair: Robert A. York Vice Chair: David Seibold
Faculty
Stephen Barley, Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professor
John E. Bowers, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor
Gary S. Hansen, Ph.D., University of Michigan, Associate Professor
Paul Leonardi, Ph.D., Stanford University, Professor
Kyle Lewis, Ph.D., University of Maryland, Professor
Renee Rottner, Ph.D., UC Irvine, Assistant Professor
David Seibold, Ph.D., Michigan State University, Professor
Robert A. York, Ph.D., Cornell University, Professor
Transitioning new technical advances 
and discoveries into products or services 
that benefit society requires business and 
interpersonal skills as well as technical 
expertise. These include an ability to work 
effectively in teams, build sound business 
models that account for the competitive 
environment, lead and manage other and 
diverse groups and apply basic marketing 
principals.
The Technology Management Program 
(TMP) provides a solid foundation in these 
areas to help cultivate managerial and 
entrepreneurial leadership for technology 
businesses.
Mission Statement
TMP is a unique educational program that 
exposes innovative, energetic, and entre-
preneurial students to key aspects of tech-
nology, business practices, new venture 
creation, and professional development. 
Dedicated to the study of management, or-
ganizational and entrepreneurial business 
processes involved in transforming new 
discoveries in science and engineering into 
economically productive enterprises, TMP 
is redefining entrepreneurial education 
with a comprehensive curriculum for the 
creation and management of tomorrow’s 
technology ventures.
The Technology Management 
Certificate
The Technology Management Certificate 
program provides students a solid foun-
dation in business fundamentals and 
entrepreneurship as it applies to new 
technologies and technology-oriented com-
panies. This certificate serves as an official 
recognition that the student has a solid 
grounding in fundamental business strate- 
gies and models, opportunity recognition 
and new-venture creation and marketing. 
The program also provides access to many 
professionals familiar with the demands of 
starting new businesses as well as running 
existing companies through its extra-curric-
ular offerings.
Technology 
Management 
Program Courses
21. Past, Present and Future of Entrepreneurship
(3) GREATHOUSEQuarters usually offered: Spring.
The historical and present state of entrepreneurship will be explored, along with the 
potential future direction of startups.  Students will be encouraged to start small ventures as a means 
of determining their proclivity for an entrepreneurial lifestyle.
111. Opportunities and Perspectives in Technology, Business, and Society
(1) STAFFPrerequisite: Writing 2 with a minimum grade of B; 
and Writing 50 or equivalent with a minimum grade of B.
Enrollment Comments: Quarters usually offered: Fall, Winter, Spring. “Writing 50 or equivalent” in the 
prerequisites is intended to include: ENGL 10, WRIT 50*, WRIT 105*, WRIT 107* & WRIT 109*
Lecture series where entrepreneurial, technological, business, and governmental leaders 
share their lessons of experience and discuss current business issues. For anyone interested 
in entrepreneurship, management, technology development, and commercialization and the impact 
that innovation has on society. 
120. Business Strategy & Leadership Skills(4) HANSEN
Prerequisite: Writing 2 with a minimum grade of B-; and, Writing 50 or equivalent with a minimum grade 
of B-; and upper division standing.Introduction to critical business principles and 
practices required by leaders for business success and societal benefit. Students will be exposed to key 
management theories, models and tools in strategy, finance, accounting, commercialization, marketing, 
and sales. 
122. Entrepreneurship(4) STAFF
Prerequisite: Writing 2 with a minimum grade of B- and Writing 50 or equivalent (ENGL 10, WRIT 50*, 
WRIT 105*, WRIT 107*, or 109*) with a minimum grade of B-.
Learn how to start any kind of venture; for profit, non-profit, service, sole-proprietorship, with a focus 
on high-tech ventures. Analysis of new business opportunities, development of customer-centric 
value propositions, financing, marketing, selling and protection of intellectual property.
124. Entrepreneurial Marketing(2) STAFF
(Offered through UC Extension)Prerequisite: Writing 2 with a minimum grade of B- 
and Writing 50 or equivalent (ENGL 10, WRIT 50*, WRIT 105*, WRIT 107*, or 109*), and upper division 
standing.Introduction to basic marketing concepts and how 
these concepts can be applied to any organization, particularly technology firms. Additionally, students 
will be introduced to how management of the marketing function within an organization is critical to 
----------------Page (45) Break----------------
TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM • 45
the organization’s success. (F, W, S)
126. New Venture Finance(2) STAFF
(Offered through UC Extension)Recommended Preparation: Economics 3A or 
equivalent.Presents the tools necessary for the 
strategic analysis and understanding of financial information particular to new ventures. Provides 
insight into how financial information can be used to design optimal financing strategies, 
prepare valuation models for new ventures, and assist in strategic planning for the venture. (F, 
W, S)
127. Organization Teams and Talent Management
(3) STAFF(Offered through UC Extension)
Prerequisite: Writing 2 with a minimum grade of B and Writing 50 with a minimum grade of B or 
equivalent, upper division standing.Focuses on the important link between the 
business and talent strategy including talent value chain, recruitment/selection strategies 
for rewards/incentives, employee relations, leadership and team formation; conflict 
resolution, problem solving, and decision-making, importance of organization culture; 
culture diversity and global village. (W, S)
130. Operations Management(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: Upper Division standing and Writing 2 and Writing 50, with grades of B- or 
better.Studies the flow of materials and information 
necessary to effectively and efficiently supply products and or services to customers. Provides 
an understanding of the principles of design and management of manufacture, service, and 
supply chain organizations, business processes and systems.
131. Introductions to Patents and Intellectual Property
(3) STAFFPrerequisite: Writing 2 with a minimum grade 
of B; and Writing 50 or equivalent (ENGL 10, WRIT 50*, WRIT 105*, WRIT 107*, or 109*) 
with a minimum grade of B-; and upper division standing.
Provides emerging inventors, entrepreneurs, and scientists with a working knowledge of 
intellectual property (patents, copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets), with the main 
focus being on patents. Will cover the basic functions of patents, structure of patents, and 
patent prosecution.
132. Business Planning for New Ventures(4) STAFF 
Prerequisite: Engineering 120 or Engineering 122; and Writing 50 or equivalent (ENGL 10, 
WRIT 50*, WRIT 105*, WRIT 107*, or 109*) with a minimum grade of B-.
Analysis and creation of a business plan for a new business venture including demand 
forecasting, financial modeling, selling of the new business idea, and other issues for current 
business conditions. 
134. Selling High Tech Products(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: Writing 2 with a minimum grade of B; and Writing 50 or equivalent (ENGL 10, 
WRIT 50*, WRIT 105*, WRIT 107*, or 109*) with a minimum grade of B-; and upper division 
standing.Learn the art of persuasion and selling. 
Theory and applications of the basic tenets of persuasion and how such scientifically supported 
techniques can be deployed to positively impact the sales process.
135. New Product Development(4) BOWERS
Prerequisite: Upper division standing.New product development requires technical 
and non-technical business persons to work across disciplines. Instruction is provided in a 
wide range of topics concerning customer driven product innovation. Students learn new product 
development processes, tools, techniques, and organizational skills.
136. Project Management(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: Upper division standing.Introduces the theory, concepts, techniques, 
vocabulary, and practical knowledge of project management practice. Students will learn about 
the process groups and knowledge areas comprising PMI’s Project Management Body of 
Knowledge. Provides a framework for conducting projects using project management principles.
144. Market Research for Business(4) STAFF
Prerequisite: Writing 2 with a minimum grade of B, and Writing 50 or equivalent with a minimum 
grade of B; and upper division standing.Enrollment Comments: Students must have a 
cumulative 3.0 for the proceeding 3 quarters. Provides a high level introduction to modern 
marketing research. Course will cover the fundamental principles and techniques for 
market validation that are critical to launch, grow, and sustain a viable business. (F, S)
148A. New Venture Seminar(3) STAFF
Recommended Preparation: TMP 122, TMP 149, or equivalent.
Quarters usually offered: Winter.A twice-weekly series of seminars about 
the creation of sustainable new business ventures from inception to launch. Intended for 
students participating in the TMP New Venture Competition. (W)
148B. New Venture Seminar(3) STAFF
Recommended Preparation: TMP 122, TMP 148A, TMP 149, or equivalent.
Quarters usually offered: Spring.Continuation of twice-weekly seminar 
series covering the development of a validated and sustainable new business, with a focus 
on creating a writing business plan and oral presentation. Intended for students participation 
in the TMP New Venture Competition finals. (S)
149. Creating a Market-Tested Business Model
(4) STAFFRecommended Preparation: TMP 122.
Quarters usually offered: Winter.Course provides an experiential learning 
opportunity, showing how a successful business model can be created through the use of 
customer and market validation process. (W)
152. Decision Analysis(3) DUNEIER
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing.Recommended Preparation: PSTAT 5 series or 
PSTAT 109Through a combination of lectures, role 
playing and case studies, students will develop an understanding of how decisions are made, 
the factors and biases that affect them, the tools that have been developed as a result, 
and the limitations that remain. The goal is to provide students with a solid foundation in the 
fundamentals of decision theory. By introducing real world applications that have a direct 
connection to the students, they will be inspired to apply what they have learned to their own 
decisions and further explore the topic well into the future.
191AA-ZZ. Special Topics in Business and Management
(2-4) STAFFPrerequisite: Upper-division standing.
Enrollment Comments: Students must have a cumulative 3.0 for the preceding 3 quarters. 
May be repeated for credit provided there is no duplication of course content.
Courses provide for the study of topics of current interest in the areas of business, 
technology, management, entrepreneurship, and other issues related to management and 
creation of sustainable businesses. 
GRADUATE COURSES
Graduate courses for this program can be found in the UCSB General Catalog.
----------------Page (46) Break----------------
46 • MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING 2016-17  
  Units
 PREPARATION FOR THE MAJOR  74
CH E 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
CH E 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
CHEM 1A, 1B, 1C or 2A, 2B, 2C......................9
CHEM 1AL, 1BL, 1CL or 2AC, 2BC, 2CC ..............6
CHEM 6AL-BL....................................6
CHEM 109A or AH, 109B or BH ......................8
ENGR 3 ..........................................3
MATH 3A-B, 4A-B, 6A-B or 4AI-4BI, 6AI.............24
PHYS 1, 2, 3, 3L ..................................12
  UPPER DIVISION MAJOR    81
CH E 107 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
CH E 110A-B......................................6
CH E 119 .........................................1
CH E 120A-B-C...................................10
CH E 128 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
CH E 132A-B-C...................................10
CH E 140A-B......................................6
CH E 152A........................................4
CH E 180A-B......................................6
CH E 184A-B......................................6
CHEM 113B-C ....................................8
MATRL 101 or MATRL 100B *^ ......................3
  *^ see note on next page
Technical Elective requirement .......................15
   Prior approval of the student’s technical electives must be obtained from the undergraduate adviser.
At least 9 of the 15 units must be in the following departments in the 
College of Engineering: CH E, ECE, MATRL, ME 
Approved Technical Elective Requirement classes:
1Three units maximum from CH E 196 and CH E 198 combined; only for students with
  GPA of 3.0 or higher.
  Technical electives taken:
  
  Units
UNIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS
American History and Institutions – (one 4-unit course, may be  
 counted as G.E. if selected from approved list)
  
UC Entry Level Requirement: English Composition
Must be fulfilled within three quarters of matriculation
Satisfied by: 
GENERAL EDUCATION 
General Subject Areas
Area A: English Reading & Comprehension – (2 courses required)
 
A-1:                                             A-2:                     
Areas D & E: Social Sciences, Culture and Thought
(2 courses minimum)
      
Areas F & G: The Arts, Literature
(2 courses minimum)
      
2 additional courses from Areas D, E, F, G, or H
      
Special Subject Areas
Depth:
      
      
Ethnicity (1 course):   
European Traditions (1 course):           
Writing (4 courses required):
      
      
NON-MAJOR ELECTIVES 32
General Education and Free Electives taken:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
TOTAL UNITS REQUIRED FOR GRADUATION ......187
Courses required for the major, inside or outside of the 
Department of Chemical Engineering, cannot be taken for the 
passed/not passed grading option.  They must be taken for letter 
grades.
       
CH E 102
CH E 121
CH E 124
CH E 125
CH E 126
CH E 141
CH E 152B
CH E 154
CH E 160
CH E 171
CH E 1961
CH E 1981
CHEM 115A,B,C
CHEM 123
CHEM 126
CHEM 142A,B,C
CHEM 145
CHEM 147
CHEM 150
ECE 130A,B,C
ECE 183
ENGR 101
ENGR 103
ENV S 105
MATH 122A,B
MATRL 100A,C
MATRL 135
MATRL 160
MATRL 185
MCDB 101A,B
MCDB 111
MCDB 126A,B,C
MCDB 133
MCDB 138
ME 110
ME 112
ME 128
ME 134
ME 169
ME 185
PHYS 123A,B
PHYS 127AL
PHYS 127BL
----------------Page (47) Break----------------
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS • 47
FRESHMAN YEAR 
FALL units WINTER  units SPRING units
CH E 5 3 CHEM 1B or 2B 3 CHEM 1C or 2C 3
CHEM 1A or 2A 3 CHEM 1BL or 2BC 2 CHEM 1CL or 2CC 2
CHEM 1AL or 2AC 2 MATH 3B 4 ENGR 3 3
MATH 3A 4 PHYS 1 4 MATH 4A or 4 AI 4
WRIT 1E or 2E 4 WRIT 2E or 50E 4 PHYS 2 4
TOTAL 16      17  16
SOPHOMORE YEAR 
FALL units WINTER  units SPRING units
CH E 10 3 CH E 107 3 CH E 110B 3
CHEM 109A or 109AH 4 CH E 110A 3 CH E 132A 4
MATH 4B or 4BI 4 CHEM 6AL 3 CHEM 6BL 3
PHYS 3 3 CHEM 109B or 109BH 4 MATH 6B 4
PHYS 3L 1 MATH 6A or 6AI 4 G.E. Elective 4 
 
TOTAL 15      17  18
JUNIOR YEAR
FALL units WINTER  units SPRING units
CH E 120A 4 CH E 120B 3 CH E 119 1
CH E 128 3 CH E 132C 3 CH E 120C 3
CH E 132B 3 CHEM 113B 4 CH E 140A 3
G.E. Elective  4 MATRL 101 or MATRL 100B* 3 CH E 180A 3
  Technical Elective  3 CHEM 113C 4
                   Technical Elective 3
TOTAL 14      16  17
SENIOR YEAR      
FALL units WINTER  units SPRING units
CH E 140B 3 CH E 180B 3 CH E 184B 3
CH E 152A 4 CH E 184A 3 G.E. Elective  8
G.E. Elective 4 G.E. Elective  4 Technical Elective  3
Technical Elective 3 Technical Elective 3               
 TOTAL 14      13  14
* If applying to the BS/MS Materials program student must take:
Sophmore year- Phys 4 in Winter or Spring
Junior year- MATRL 100A in Fall, MATRL 100B in winter, MATRL 100C in Spring 
  ^Students may only count one course toward the major. (MATRL 101 OR MATRL 100B)
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING 2016-17 
----------------Page (48) Break----------------
48 • MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
COMPUTER  ENGINEERING 2016-17 
  Units
  PREPARATION FOR THE MAJOR  75
CHEM 1A, 1AL or 2A, 2AC ........................5
CMPSC 16 ......................................4
CMPSC 24 ......................................4
CMPSC 32 ......................................4
CMPSC 40 ......................................5
ECE 1A- 1B .....................................2
ECE 10A, 10AL, 10B, 10BL, 10C, 10CL .............15
ECE 15A ........................................4
MATH 3A-B, 4A-B ..............................16
PHYS 1, 2, 3, 3L, 4, 4L ............................16
  UPPER DIVISION MAJOR   68
CMPSC 130A ....................................4
ECE 139 or PSTAT 120A ...........................4
ECE 152A .......................................5
ECE 154A .......................................4
ENGR 101 .......................................3
Computer Engineering electives selected
 from the following list: ...........................48
Prior approval of the student’s departmental electives must
 be obtained from the student’s faculty adviser.
Must include at least 2 sequences and 8 units of senior 
computer systems project CMPSC 189 A-B/ECE 189A-B. 
Computer Engineering electives taken:                    
           
           
           
           
MATH, SCIENCE, ENGR. ELECTIVE 4
 (See ECE Dept. student office for the approved list)
Elective taken:   
 
  Units
UNIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS
American History and Institutions – (one 4-unit course)
(may be counted as G.E. if selected from approved list)
  
UC Entry Level Requirement: English Composition
Must be fulfilled within three quarters of matriculation
Satisfied by: 
GENERAL EDUCATION 
General Subject Areas
Area A: English Reading & Comprehension – (2 courses required)
 
A-1:                                             A-2:                     
Areas D & E: Social Sciences, Culture and Thought
(2 courses minimum)
      
Areas F & G: The Arts, Literature
(2 courses minimum)
      
2 additional courses from Areas D, E, F, G, or H
      
Special Subject Areas
Depth:
      
      
Ethnicity (1 course):   
European Traditions (1 course):           
Writing (4 courses required):
      
      
NON-MAJOR ELECTIVES 44
General Education and Free Electives taken:
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
TOTAL UNITS REQUIRED FOR GRADUATION ......191
Courses required for the major, inside or outside of the Departments 
of Computer Science or Electrical and Computer Engineering, cannot 
be taken for the passed/not passed grading option. They must be 
taken for letter grades.
CMPSC 130B 
CMPSC138 
CMPSC 153A/ECE153A
CMPSC 160
CMPSC 162
CMPSC 165A-B
CMPSC 170
CMPSC 171/ ECE 151
CMPSC 176A-B/ECE 155A-B 
CMPSC 176C 
CMPSC 177
CMPSC 178
CMPSC 181B/ECE 181B
ECE 122A-B
ECE 123
ECE 130A-B
ECE 147A-B
ECE 150
ECE 153B
ECE 154B
ECE 156A-B
ECE 160/CMPSC 182
ECE 178
ECE 179D, 179P
ECE 189A-B/ CMPSC 189A-B
----------------Page (49) Break----------------
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS • 49
COMPUTER  ENGINEERING 2016-17 
FRESHMAN YEAR 
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
CHEM 1A or 2A 3 ECE 1A   1 CMPSC 16 4
CHEM 1AL or 2AC 2 Math, Science,  ECE 1B 1
MATH 3A 4 Engr. Elective 4 MATH 4A 4
G.E. Elective or CMPSC 81 4 MATH 3B 4 PHYS 2 4
WRIT 1E or 2E 4 PHYS 1 4 WRIT 50E or G.E. Elective 4
   WRIT 2E or 50E 4              
 
TOTAL 17      17  17
SOPHOMORE YEAR 
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
CMPSC 24 4 CMPSC 40 5 CMPSC 32 4
ECE 10A 3 ECE 10B 3 ECE 10C 3
ECE 10AL 2 ECE10BL 2 ECE 10CL 2
MATH 4B 4 ECE 15A  4 ECE 152A 5
PHYS 3 3    PHYS 4 3 ECE 139 or PSTAT 120A2 4
PHYS 3L 1 PHYS 4L 1 
   
TOTAL 17      18  18
JUNIOR YEAR   
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
ECE 154A 4 CMPSC 130A 4 CMPEN Elective 8 
CMPEN Elective 8 CMPEN Elective 4  G.E. or Free Elective 4
G.E. or Free Electives 4 G.E. or Free Electives 8 
          
          
TOTAL 16      16  12
          
SENIOR YEAR   
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
CMPEN Electives 12 CMPEN Electives 8 CMPEN Electives 12
Free Elective 4 ENGR 1013 3  
  Free Elective 4 
TOTAL 16      15  12
1 CMPSC 8 is recommended only for students who do not have prior programming experience, as programming experience is a prerequisite for CMPSC 16.
    CS 8 may be used to satisfy the Math, Science, Engineering Elective requirement. 
2 PSTAT 120A is offered each quarter. ECE 139 is offered only in spring quarter, and is better suited for future upper division electives for  the Computer Engineering major.
3 ENGR 101 may be taken any quarter of senior year. 
----------------Page (50) Break----------------
50 • MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
  Units
  PREPARATION FOR THE MAJOR  53
CMPSC 16 ......................................4
CMPSC 24 . .....................................4
CMPSC 32 ......................................4
CMPSC 40 ......................................5
CMPSC 48 ......................................4
CMPSC 56 ......................................4
CMPSC 64 ......................................4
MATH 3A-B, 4A-B, 6A ...........................20
PSTAT 120A .....................................4
 
  UPPER DIVISION MAJOR   63
CMPSC 111 or 140 ................................4
CMPSC 130A-B ..................................8
CMPSC 138 .....................................4
CMPSC 154 .....................................4
CMPSC 160 .....................................4
CMPSC 162 .....................................4
CMPSC 170 .....................................4
ENGR 101 .......................................3
PSTAT 120B .....................................4
Major Field Electives .............................24
(selected from the following list (at least 8 units must be CMPSC courses))
Prior approval of the student’s major field electives must be obtained 
from the faculty advisor.
CMPSC 1111 CMPSC 185 MATH 119A-B
CMPSC 1401 CMPSC 189 A-B MATH 124A-B
CMPSC/ECE 153A CMPSC 190 AA-ZZ PSTAT 122          
CMPSC 165A-B CMPSC 1922 PSTAT 130 
CMPSC 171/ECE 151 CMPSC 1962 PSTAT 160A-B
CMPSC 174A ECE 130A-B-C 
CMPSC 176A-B-C ECE 152A 
CMPSC 177 ECE 153B   
CMPSC 178 ECE160 
CMPSC 180 ECE 178 
CMPSC 181B/ECE 181B MATH 108A-B 
  1
CMPSC 111 or CMPSC 140 can be used as an elective if not taken as a major course.2Four units maximum from CMPSC 192 and CMPSC 196 combined; only for students with 
GPA of 3.0 or higher.
Major Field Electives taken:
 SCIENCE COURSES 20
PHYS 1, 2, 3, 3L .................................12
Science Electives (see Dept. for list) ..................8
Science Electives taken:
  
  
Courses required for the major, inside or outside of the Department of 
Computer Science, cannot be taken for the passed/not passed grading 
option.  They must be taken for letter grades.
COMPUTER SCIENCE 2016-17 
  Units
UNIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS
American History and Institutions – (one 4-unit course, may be  
 counted as G.E. if selected from approved list)
  
UC Entry Level Requirement: English Composition
Must be fulfilled within three quarters of matriculation
Satisfied by: 
GENERAL EDUCATION 
General Subject Areas
Area A: English Reading & Comprehension – (2 courses required)
 
A-1:                                             A-2:                     
Areas D & E: Social Sciences, Culture and Thought
(2 courses minimum)
      
Areas F & G: The Arts, Literature
(2 courses minimum)
      
2 additional courses from Areas D, E, F, G, or H
      
Special Subject Areas
Depth:
      
      
Ethnicity (1 course):   
European Traditions (1 course):           
Writing (4 courses required):
      
      
NON-MAJOR ELECTIVES 48
General Education and Free Electives taken:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
TOTAL UNITS REQUIRED FOR GRADUATION ......184
----------------Page (51) Break----------------
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS • 51
FRESHMAN YEAR  
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
G.E. Elective or CMPSC 8* 4 CMPSC 16 4 CMPSC 24 4
MATH 3A 4 MATH 3B 4 MATH 4A 4
WRIT 1, 2, or G.E. Elective 4 PHYS 1 4 PHYS 2 4
G.E. Elective 4 WRIT 1, 2, or G.E. Elective 4 Science or Free Elective 4 
TOTAL 16  16     16
SOPHOMORE YEAR  
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
CMPSC 32 4 CMPSC 56 4 CMPSC 48 4
CMPSC 40 5 CMPSC 64 4 Math 6A 4
MATH 4B 4 PSTAT 120A 4 G.E. Elective 4
PHYS 3 3 WRIT 50 4 Science or Free Elective 4 
PHYS 3L 1      
TOTAL 17  16     16
JUNIOR YEAR   
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
CMPSC 130A 4 CMPSC 130B 4 CMPSC 154 4
CMPSC 138 4 Field Elective 5 PSTAT 120B 4
G.E. Elective 4 Free Elective 3 Field or Free Elective 4
Science or Free Elective 4 G.E. Elective 4 G.E. Elective 4
TOTAL 16  16     16
SENIOR YEAR  
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
CMPSC 111 ** 4 CMPSC 170 4 Field or Free Elective 4
CMPSC 160 4 CMPSC 162 4 Field or Free Elective 4
Field or Free Elective 4 ENGR 101*** 3 G.E. or Free Elective 5
  Field or Free Elective 4                 
TOTAL 12  15     13
*   CMPSC 8 is recommended only for students who do not have prior programming experience; 
 programming experience is a prerequisite for CMPSC 16.
** Or you may take CMPSC 140 in Winter Quarter to satisfy this requirement.
*** ENGR 101 may be taken any quarter of senior year. 
COMPUTER SCIENCE 2016-17 
----------------Page (52) Break----------------
52 • MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
  Units
UNIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS
American History and Institutions – (one 4-unit course, may be  
 counted as G.E. if selected from approved list)
  
UC Entry Level Requirement: English Composition
Must be fulfilled within three quarters of matriculation
Satisfied by: 
GENERAL EDUCATION 
General Subject Areas
Area A: English Reading & Comprehension – (2 courses required)
 
A-1:                                             A-2:                     
Areas D & E: Social Sciences, Culture and Thought
(2 courses minimum)
      
Areas F & G: The Arts, Literature
(2 courses minimum)
      
2 additional courses from Areas D, E, F, G, or H
      
Special Subject Areas
Depth:
      
      
Ethnicity (1 course):   
European Traditions (1 course):           
Writing (4 courses required):
      
      
NON-MAJOR ELECTIVES 42
General Education and Free Electives taken:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
TOTAL UNITS REQUIRED FOR GRADUATION ......189
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 2016-17 
  Units
  PREPARATION FOR THE MAJOR  79
 
CHEM 1A, 1AL or 2A, 2AC........................5
CMPSC 16......................................4
ECE 5..........................................4
ECE 10A, 10AL, 10B, 10BL, 10C, 10CL.............15
ECE 15A .......................................4
ENGR 3 ........................................3 
MATH 3A-B, 4A-B, 6A-B.........................24
PHYS 1, 2, 3, 3L, 4, 4L, 5, 5L......................20
UPPER DIVISION MAJOR   68
ECE 130A-B ....................................8
ECE 132........................................4
ECE 134........................................4
ECE 137A-B ....................................8
ECE 139........................................4
ECE 152A ......................................5
ENGR 101 ......................................3
Departmental electives selected from 
the following list:................................32
Prior approval of the student’s departmental electives must 
be obtained from the student’s faculty adviser. 
Must include at least 2 sequences, one of which must be an 
approved EE Senior Capstone Design/Project course sequence.
Approved Departmental Electives:
ECE 120A-B ECE 147A-B-C ECE 179D, P
ECE 122A-B ECE 148 ECE 181B
ECE 123 ECE 150 ECE 183
ECE 125 ECE 153A-B ECE 188A-B-C
ECE 130C ECE 154A-B ECE 192 or 196 (4 units combined max) 
ECE 135 ECE 155A-B ECE 194AA-ZZ(excluding ECE 194R) 
ECE 141A-B ECE 156A-B TMP 120, 122
ECE 142 ECE 158     (1 course max)
ECE 144 ECE 160 MATRL 100A, C
ECE 145A-B-C ECE 162A-B-C MATRL 100B or MATRL 101
ECE 146A-B ECE 178 MATRL 162A-B 
                                      
 
Departmental Electives taken:
   
Courses required for the major, inside or outside of the 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, cannot 
be taken for the passed/not passed grading option.  They must 
be taken for letter grades.
----------------Page (53) Break----------------
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS • 53
FRESHMAN YEAR  
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
CHEM 1A or 2A 3 ECE 5 4 CMPSC 16 4
CHEM 1AL or 2AC 2 MATH 3B 4    MATH 4A 4
ENGR 3 3 PHYS 1 4 PHYS 2 4
MATH 3A 4 WRIT 2E or 50E 4 WRIT 50E or G.E.  4
WRIT 1E or 2E 4              
TOTAL 16  16   16
SOPHOMORE YEAR  
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
ECE 10A                                       3  ECE 10B 3 ECE 10C 3
ECE 10AL                                     2             ECE 10BL                                  2              ECE 10CL                         2
MATH 4B 4 ECE 15A 4 MATH 6B 4
PHYS 3 3 MATH 6A 4 PHYS 5 3
PHYS 3L 1 PHYS 4 3 PHYS 5L 1
  PHYS 4L 1 
TOTAL 13  17   13
JUNIOR YEAR  
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
ECE 130A 4 ECE 130B 4 ECE 137B 4
ECE 132 4 ECE 137A 4 ECE 139 1 4
ECE 134  4 ECE Elective 4 ECE 152A 2 5
G.E. or Free Elective 4 G.E. or Free Elective 4 G.E. or Free Elective 4
TOTAL 16  16   17
SENIOR YEAR  
FALL units WINTER units SPRING units
ECE Electives 12 ECE Electives 8 ECE Electives 8
G.E. or Free Elective 4 G.E. or Free Electives 8 ENGR 101 3 3
                G.E. or Free Electives 6
TOTAL 16  16   17
 
1 ECE 139 may also be taken in the spring quarter of the sophomore year.
2 ECE 152A may also be taken in the spring quarter of the sophomore year. 
3   ENGR 101 may be taken any quarter of senior year.
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 2016-17 
----------------Page (54) Break----------------
54 • MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
  Units
  PREPARATION FOR THE MAJOR  76
CHEM 1A, 1AL, 1B, 1BL or 2A, 2AC, 2B, 2BC.......10
ENGR 3 ........................................3
MATH 3A-B, 4A-B, 6A-B.........................24
ME 6...........................................4
ME 10..........................................4
ME 14..........................................4
ME 15..........................................4
ME 16..........................................4
ME 17..........................................3
PHYS 1, 2, 3, 3L, 4, 4L ...........................16
 
  UPPER DIVISION MAJOR    70
Third Year
MATRL 101 or MATRL 100B*......................3
ME 104.........................................3
ME 105.........................................4
ME 140A .......................................3
ME 151A-B-C ..................................11
ME 152A-B .....................................7
ME 153.........................................3
ME 155A .......................................3
ME 163.........................................3
 * see note on next pageFourth Year
ME 154.........................................3
ME 156A-B .....................................6
ME 189A-B-C ...................................6
Engineering Electives ............................15
Prior approval of the student’s departmental electives must be obtained from    
the student’s faculty adviser.  Note, the list of approved electives may change 
from year to year and that not all courses are offered each year.
Approved Engineering Electives: 
                                       
    1 Four  units maximum from ME 197 and ME 199 combined.
  Engineering Electives taken:           
 
   Units
UNIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS
American History and Institutions – (one 4-unit course, may be  
 counted as G.E. if selected from approved list)
  
UC Entry Level Requirement: English Composition
Must be fulfilled within three quarters of matriculation
Satisfied by: 
GENERAL EDUCATION 
General Subject Areas
Area A: English Reading & Comprehension – (2 courses required)
 
A-1:                                             A-2:                     
Areas D & E: Social Sciences, Culture and Thought
(2 courses minimum)
      
Areas F & G: The Arts, Literature
(2 courses minimum)
      
2 additional courses from Areas D, E, F, G, or H
      
Special Subject Areas
Depth:
      
      
Ethnicity (1 course):   
European Traditions (1 course):           
Writing (4 courses required):
      
      
NON-MAJOR ELECTIVES 44
General Education and Free Electives taken:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
TOTAL UNITS REQUIRED FOR GRADUATION ......190
Courses required for the major, inside or outside of the Department 
of Mechanical Engineering, cannot be taken for the passed/not 
passed grading option.  They must be taken for letter grades.
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING 2016-17  
CHEM 109A
CHEM 123
ECE 147A,C
ECE 181B
ENGR 101
ENGR 195A,B,C
ENV S 105
MATRL 100A
MATRL 100C
MATRL 186
MATRL 188
ME 106A
ME 110
ME 112
ME 114
ME 124 
ME 125 AA-ZZ
ME 128
ME 134
ME138
ME140B
ME141A,B
ME 146
ME 147
ME 155B
ME 157
ME 158
ME 162
ME 166
ME 167
ME 168
ME 169
ME 179D,L,P
ME 185
ME 186
ME 197 1
ME 199 1
TMP 120, 122
   (max 1 course)
----------------Page (55) Break----------------
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS • 55
FRESHMAN YEAR
FALL units WINTER  units SPRING units
CHEM 1A or 2A 3 CHEM 1B or 2B 3 MATH 4A 4
CHEM 1AL or 2AC 2 CHEM 1BL or 2BC 2 ME 10 4
ENGR 3 or  G.E. Elective 3/4 MATH 3B 4 PHYS 2 4
MATH 3A 4 PHYS 1 4 WRIT 50E,  ENGR 3, or 3/4
WRIT 1E or 2E 4 WRIT 2E or 50E 4 G.E. Elective  
TOTAL 16/17   17  15/16
SOPHOMORE YEAR 
FALL units WINTER  units SPRING units
MATH 4B 4 MATH 6A 4 MATH 6B 4
ME 14 4 ME 6 4 ME 16 4
PHYS 3 3 ME 15 4 ME 17 3
PHYS 3L 1 PHYS 4 3 G.E. Elective 4
G.E. Elective 4 PHYS 4L 1             
TOTAL 16   16  15
JUNIOR YEAR  
FALL units WINTER  units SPRING units
ME 104 3 MATRL 101 or  3 ME 105 4
ME 140A 3    MATRL 100B*^  ME 153 3
ME 151A 4 ME 151B 4 ME 151C 3
ME 152A 4 ME 152B 3 ME 155A 3
G.E. or Free Elective 4 ME 163 3 G.E. or Free Elective 4
  G.E. or Free Elective 4 
TOTAL 18   17  17
SENIOR YEAR    
FALL units WINTER  units SPRING units
ME 154 or ME 167** 3 ME 156B 3 ME 189C 2
ME 156A 3 ME 189B 2 Departmental Electives 6
ME 189A 2 Departmental Electives 6 G.E. or Free Electives 4
Departmental Electives 3 G.E. or Free Elective 4
G.E. or Free Elective 4
TOTAL 15   15  12
* If applying to the BS/MS Materials program, juniors must take MATRL 100A in Fall, MATRL 100B in Winter, and MATRL 100C in Spring.
** If using ME 167 to satisfy the ME 154 requirement, students may not count ME 167 as an Engineering Elective.
  ^Students may only count one course toward the major. (MATRL 101 OR MATRL 100B)
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING 2016-17 
----------------Page (56) Break----------------
56
Additional Resources and Information
  Phone Email Location
College Advising staff          (805) 893-2809 coe-info@engr.ucsb.edu Harold Frank Hall, Rm. 1006 
Departmental Advisors:
Chemical Engineering            893-8671 cheugrads@engr.ucsb.edu Engr.II, Rm. 3357
Computer Engineering           893-8292 ugradinfo@ece.ucsb.edu Trailer 380, Rm. 101
Computer Science                 893-4321 ugradv@cs.ucsb.edu Frank Hall, Rm. 2104
Electrical Engineering            893-8292 ugradinfo@ece.ucsb.edu Trailer 380, Rm. 101
Mechanical Engineering         893-8198 meugrad@engr.ucsb.edu Engr.II, Rm. 2335
Technology Management       893-2729 tmp@tmp.ucsb.edu Phelps 1333
     Program
Gaucho On-Line Data  (GOLD) – student record, class registration, degree audits—https://my.sa.ucsb.edu/gold
UMAIL – campus email for official notifications —http://www.umail.ucsb.edu
Schedule of Classes information – quarterly calendar and information—http://www.registrar.ucsb.edu
General Catalog for UCSB – academic requirements for all campus majors—http://my.sa.ucsb.edu/Catalog/
Summer Sessions – Summer programs and course offerings—http://www.summer.ucsb.edu
Tutoring – course-specific tutoring and academic skills development—http://www.clas.ucsb.edu
Education Abroad Program – EAP options for engineering students—email: eap@engineering.ucsb.edu
College Honors Program – program information and opportunities—email: honors@engineering.ucsb.edu
Advising Staff
College Advisors:  general education requirements, academic standing, final degree clearance
Departmental Advisors:  course selection, class enrollment, change of major, academic requirements
----------------Page (57) Break----------------
57
Policy on Academic Conduct
It is expected that all students in the College of Engineering, as well as those who take courses within the 
College, understand and subscribe to the ideal of academic integrity. To provide guidance on this, the College 
of Engineering has adopted a policy on expected academic conduct, a full copy of which appears below. As 
an example, it is not acceptable by default to work collaboratively on a homework assignment. In computer 
programming courses, a mere preliminary discussion of an assignment can lead to similarities in the final program 
that are detectable by sophisticated plagiarism detection software (see http://theory.stanford.edu/~aiken/moss/).
Instructors who have established that academic misconduct has occurred in their class have a variety of options at 
their disposal, which range from allowing the student to redo the work and/or assigning a failing grade to referring 
the case to the UCSB Judicial Affairs Office for either a letter of warning or a formal hearing before the Student-
Faculty Committee on Student Conduct. Instructors are encouraged to discuss these remedies in further detail 
with the Associate Dean for Undergraduate Studies in the College of Engineering. Moreover, students who have 
been suspended because of academic misconduct charges are encouraged to work with the College of Engineering 
Undergraduate Office to develop an amended schedule that will permit the timeliest possible completion of a 
degree program.
College of Engineering Policy 
The College of Engineering’s Academic Conduct Policy is compatible with that of the University of California, 
in that it is expected that students understand and subscribe to the ideal of academic integrity, and are willing to 
bear individual responsibility for their work. Any work (written or otherwise) submitted to fulfill an academic 
requirement must represent a student’s original work. Any act of academic dishonesty, such as cheating or 
plagiarism, will subject a person to University disciplinary action.
Cheating is defined by UCSB as the use, or attempted use, of materials, information, study aids, or services not 
authorized by the instructor of the course. The College of Engineering interprets this to include the unauthorized 
use of notes, study aids, electronic or other equipment during an examination or quiz; copying or looking 
at another individual’s examination or quiz; taking or passing information to another individual during an 
examination or quiz; taking an examination or quiz for another individual; allowing another individual to take 
one’s examination; stealing examinations or quizzes. Students working on take-home exams or quizzes should not 
consult students or sources other than those permitted by the instructor.
Plagiarism is defined by UCSB as the representation of words, ideas, or concepts of another person without 
appropriate attribution. The College of Engineering expands this definition to include the use of or presentation of 
computer code, formulae, ideas, or research results without appropriate attribution.
Collaboration on homework assignments (i.e., problem sets), especially in light of the recognized pedagogical 
benefit of group study, is dictated by standards that can and do vary widely from course to course and instructor 
to instructor. The use of old solution sets and published solution guides presents a similar situation. Because 
homework assignments serve two functions--helping students learn the material and helping instructors evaluate 
academic performance--it is usually not obvious how much collaboration or assistance from commonly-available 
solutions, if any, the instructor expects. It is therefore imperative that students and instructors play an active role 
in communicating expectations about the nature and extent of collaboration or assistance from materials that is 
permissible or encouraged.
Expectations of Members of the College Academic Community
In their classes, faculty are expected to (i) announce and discuss specific problems of academic dishonesty that 
pertain particularly to their classes (e.g., acceptable and unacceptable cooperation on projects or homework); 
(ii) act reasonably to prevent academic dishonesty in preparing and administering academic exercises, including 
examinations, laboratory activities, homework and other assignments, etc.; (iii) act to prevent cheating from 
continuing when it has been observed or reported to them by students, chairs, or deans; and, (iv) clearly define for 
students the maximum level of collaboration permitted for their work to still be considered individual work.
In their academic work, students are expected to (i) maintain personal academic integrity; (ii) treat all exams and 
quizzes as work to be conducted privately, unless otherwise instructed; (iii) take responsibility for knowing the 
limits of permissible or expected cooperation on any assignment.
----------------Page (58) Break----------------
Follow, Like and Find 
UC Santa Barbara College of Engineering on Social Media 
/ucsb.engineering
@ucsbengineering
@ucsbengineering
/ucsbengineering
----------------Page (59) Break----------------
